How do Extended Beneﬁts aﬀect Unemployment Duration?
A Regression Discontinuity Approach
Rafael Lalive
University of Lausanne and CEPR∗
First version: February 24, 2006
This version: January 18, 2007
Abstract
This paper studies a targeted program that extends the maximum duration of unemployment
beneﬁts from 30 weeks to 209 weeks in Austria. Sharp discontinuities in treatment assignment
at age 50 and at the border between eligible regions and control regions identify the eﬀect
of extended beneﬁts on unemployment duration.
Results indicate that the duration of job
search is prolonged by at least .09 weeks per additional week of beneﬁts among men, whereas
unemployment duration increases by at least .32 weeks per additional week of beneﬁts. This
ﬁnding is consistent with a lower early retirement age applying to women.
JEL-Classiﬁcation: C41, J64, J65
Keywords: beneﬁt duration, unemployment duration, early retirement, regression discontinuity
∗Address: University of Lausanne, HEC/DEEP, CH-1015 Lausanne, Rafael.Lalive@unil.ch, Tel. +41 21 692
3431, Fax. +41 21 692 33 05. I am also aﬃliated with CESifo, IEW, IFAU, and IZA.

1
Introduction
Structural unemployment diﬀers tremendously among countries at relatively similar stages of
economic development. For instance, the 20 OECD member countries analyzed by Nickell and
Layard (1999) are characterized by an average unemployment rate over the period 1983 to
1996 of about 8 %; but the standard deviation in unemployment rates across these countries
amounts to more than 4 %.
The literature on labor market institutions documents strong
diﬀerences in policies that appear to contribute to unemployment with unemployment insurance
being one of the most important candidate explanations. In particular, the potential duration
of unemployment beneﬁts is strongly correlated with structural unemployment (Nickell and
Layard, 1999). The idea is that extended beneﬁt duration discourages job search and thus leads
to prolonged unemployment duration.
This paper proposes to identify the causal eﬀect of extending beneﬁts on the duration of
job search using information on a unique policy change in Austria. In June 1988, the Austrian
government extended the potential duration of unemployment beneﬁts from 30 weeks to 209
weeks for job seekers aged 50 or older when entering unemployment, living for at least 6 months in
certain regions of Austria, who satisfy a previous work requirement. There are several interesting
aspects of this regional extended beneﬁt program (REBP). First, the REBP provides a unique
opportunity to study the eﬀect of a dramatic increase in the potential beneﬁt duration by almost
3.5 years. The existing literature on the eﬀects of potential beneﬁt duration on unemployment
duration are primarily based on extensions of beneﬁt duration by one or two quarters.1
Second, the program is strictly targeted with respect to age at entry into unemployment
and place of residence – two dimensions that can be readily observed in the available data.
The age based identiﬁcation strategy compares job seekers who are aged 50 years to job seekers
who just fail the age requirement. This strategy is intuitively appealing because both groups
of job seekers are basically of the same age. However, since the program was strictly applied
conditional on having completed the 50th year of age, the slightly older group of job seekers has
access to REBP whereas the slightly younger group of job seekers does not have access to REBP.
Thus assignment to treatment takes place in a so-called ”sharp” regression discontinuity design
(Hahn et al., 2001). One potentially important concern with this strategy is that ﬁrms and
workers could try to manipulate age at entry into unemployment. In particular, ﬁrms might be
willing to oﬀer to their employees not to lay them oﬀuntil they just satisfy the age requirement.2
1For instance, Katz and Meyer (1990) use state variation in federal supplementation of potential beneﬁt
duration by one quarter (13 week) triggered by high unemployment.
Lalive et al. (2006) study changes in
potential beneﬁt duration in Austria by 9, and 22 weeks respectively.
2Such a reaction can invalidate the regression discontinuity assumption that average unemployment duration
for individuals just missing the age threshold is informative on the counterfactual duration without treatment for
1

The paper therefore proposes to focus on the second threshold, the border between treated and
control regions, to identify the eﬀect of REBP on unemployment duration. This geography based
strategy contrasts individuals living close to both sides of the border between treated and control
regions. This contrast is appealing because labor market conditions are quite similar within a
tightly deﬁned geographical area. Moreover, in contrast to age at entry into unemployment,
region of residence can not be readily manipulated because workers have to move from control
to treated regions well in advance of the eventual layoﬀ.
Third, Austrian social insurance legislation allows for early retirement at age 54 years for
unemployed women but only at age 59 years for unemployed men. This means that REBP can
also be used to study the interactions between unemployment insurance provisions and early re-
tirement rules. Speciﬁcally, by performing separate analyses for women and men, this paper can
discuss the likely impacts of having an early retirement option after exhausting unemployment
beneﬁts among women compared to not having this option among men.
This paper contributes to two strands of the literature. The ﬁrst strand is concerned with
measuring the eﬀects of potential beneﬁt duration on unemployment duration. A selective list
of contributions includes Card and Levine (2000), Hunt (1995), Katz and Meyer (1990), Lalive
and Zweim¨uller (2004b), Moﬃtt (1985), Moﬃtt and Nicholson (1982), Winter-Ebmer (1998) and
Van Ours and Vodopivec (2006). These contributions to the literature are primarily based on
diﬀerences-in-diﬀerences approaches.3 The present paper goes beyond the existing literature in
proposing to use the regression discontinuity approach. This design is appealing. Berger et al.
(2005) ﬁnd that the regression discontinuity design very robustly identiﬁes the eﬀect that would
be found in a randomized experiment. The smaller second strand of the literature discusses
interactions between unemployment insurance and early retirement.
Heyma and Van Ours
(2006) study how the early retirement option aﬀects job ﬁnding rates among older workers in
the Netherlands. Riphahn (1997) compares the determinants of transitions into unemployment
and disability among older workers in German data. She concludes that critical variables such
as individual health or aggregate unemployment have clearly diﬀerent eﬀects on the two forms
of exit from employment. Dahl et al. (1999) reach a similar conclusion using Norwegian data.
The main contributions of this paper are the following. First, the paper studies a dramatic
change in potential beneﬁt duration. This is appealing from an economic viewpoint because
it provides evidence on the maximum extent to which changing the potential beneﬁt duration
individuals who have just turned 50 years. See McCrary (2005) and Lee and McCrary (2005) for a discussion of
manipulation in the regression discontinuity design.
3In the static labor supply literature, Lemieux and Milligan (2005) study the incentive eﬀects of social assistance
on the decision to work in a regression discontinuity design (RDD) and discuss the relationship between the RDD
and the diﬀerences-in-diﬀerences approach. Moreover, Card et al. (2006) discuss the likely reasons for the eﬀects
of extended beneﬁts on unemployment duration exploiting discontinuities in Austrian severance pay rules.
2

contributes to unemployment. Moreover, because the treatment dose is so large, a graphical
analysis of the treatment eﬀect is quite informative. Second, this paper identiﬁes the eﬀects
of the same change in potential beneﬁt duration at two thresholds – the age threshold and the
border threshold. This is useful because the regression discontinuity assumption may be satisﬁed
for the geographic analysis but not necessarily for the age based strategy. Moreover, because the
eﬀect of treatment may depend on the characteristics of individuals, this paper illustrates that
the average eﬀects identiﬁed at two thresholds do not agree because the underlying threshold
populations diﬀer. Third, the analysis uses rich, high quality, comprehensive data from two
administrative sources, the Austrian social security database, and the Austrian unemployment
insurance register. These data provide a comprehensive account of the entire work history of
individuals since the year 1972. Moreover, the data record very accurately both the age at entry
into unemployment and the place of residence of job seekers. These two pieces of information are
crucial in implementing a convincing regression discontinuity identiﬁcation strategy. Fourth, the
data cover the universe of all unemployment spells. This allows concentrating on unemployment
spells that are fairly close to the age and border thresholds thus limiting the possible biases due
to mis-speciﬁcation. Indeed, results indicate that the eﬀects of both age and distance border on
average unemployment duration can be captured in a relatively simple manner – a model with a
linear trend on both sides of the threshold. This means that the empirical analysis convincingly
identiﬁes the eﬀect of extended beneﬁts and early retirement rules on unemployment duration.
Fifth, many countries are developing strategies for their pension systems to be able to cope with
rapidly ageing populations. This paper argues that it may be important to focus on pathways
to retirement that are generated by social assistance programs outside the pension system.
The outline of this paper is as follows. Section 2 provides background on the unemployment
insurance system, on the regional extended beneﬁt program, and on the early retirement rules
in Austria. Section 3 discusses the dataset and provides descriptive statistics on the sub-samples
of eligible and ineligible job seekers used in the main analysis. Section 4 provides descriptive
evidence on the eﬀects of REBP on unemployment duration, on the composition of the unem-
ployment inﬂow, and on the size of the unemployment inﬂow. Section 5 discusses identiﬁcation
and estimation of treatment eﬀects in the regression discontinuity design. Section 6 provides the
regression analysis of the eﬀects of REBP on unemployment duration, and section 7 concludes
this paper with a summary of our ﬁndings.
3

2
Background
This section discusses the Austrian unemployment insurance and early retirement rules and it
provides background on the REBP. Moreover, the section discusses why the REBP may aﬀect
women diﬀerently from men.
Unemployment insurance: The design of the Austrian unemployment insurance system
is encoded in a national unemployment insurance law (Arbeitslosenversicherungsgesetz). Before
August 1989, an unemployed person could draw regular unemployment beneﬁts (UB) for a maxi-
mum period of 30 weeks provided that he or she had paid unemployment insurance contributions
for at least 156 weeks within the last 5 years.4 In August 1989 the potential duration of UB
payments became dependent not only on previous experience but also on age at the beginning
of the unemployment spell. Beneﬁt duration for the age group 40-49 was increased to 39 weeks
if the unemployed has been employed 312 weeks within the last 10 years prior to the current
spell. For the age group 50 and older, UB-duration was increased to 52 weeks if the unemployed
has been employed for at least 468 weeks within the last 15 years.
Voluntary quitters and workers discharged for misconduct can not claim beneﬁts until a
waiting period of 4 weeks has passed.
UB recipients are expected to search actively for a
new job that should be within the scope of the claimant’s qualiﬁcations, at least during the
ﬁrst months of the unemployment spell. Non-compliance with the eligibility rules is subject to
beneﬁt sanctions that can lead to the withdrawal of beneﬁts for up to 4 weeks.
Compared to other European countries, the replacement ratio (UB relative to gross monthly
earnings) is rather low. The amount of UB payments depends on previous earnings and, in 1990,
the replacement ratio was 40.4 % for the median income earner; 48.2 % for a low-wage worker
who earned half the median; and 29.6 % for a high-wage worker earning twice the median. On
top, family allowances are paid. UB payments are not taxed implying that net-replacement
rates are substantially higher than 40 %, and there is no experience rating of ﬁrms.
After UB payments have been exhausted, job seekers can apply for ’transfer payments for
those in need’ (Notstandshilfe).5 As the name indicates, these social assistance transfers are
means-tested. Social assistance payments depend on the income and wealth situation of other
family members and close relatives and may, in principle, last for an indeﬁnite time period. These
transfers are granted for successive periods of 39 weeks after which eligibility requirements are
recurrently checked. The social assistance transfers are lower than UB and can at most be 92
% of UB. In 1990, the median post-UB transfer payment was about 70 % of the median UB
4UB duration was 20 weeks for job-seekers who did not meet this requirement. This paper focuses on individuals
who were entitled to at least 30 weeks of beneﬁts.
5This implies that job seekers who do not meet UB eligibility criteria can apply at the beginning of their spell
4

among job seekers who were eligible for social assistance. Note however, that individuals who
are eligible for such transfers may not be comparable to individuals who collect UB because not
all individuals who exhaust UB pass the means test. The majority of the unemployed (59 %)
received UB whereas 26 % received social assistance transfers.
The Regional Extended Beneﬁts Program: The background of the REBP is strongly
tied to the history of the Austrian steel sector. To protect its assets after World War II from
Soviet appropriation and to provide the capital needed for reconstruction, Austria nationalized
its iron, steel, and oil industries, large segments of the heavy engineering and electrical industries,
most of the coal mines, and the nonferrous metals industries. State owned ﬁrms in manufacturing
were part of a large holding company, the Oesterreichische Industrie AG, OeIAG. By the mid-
1970s this holding company was running into serious problems related to shrinking markets,
overstaﬃng, too heavy concentration on outmoded smokestack industries, insuﬃcient research
and development, and low productivity. Initially, the Austrian government covered the losses
by subsidies. But in 1986, after the steel industry was hit by an oil speculation scandal and
failure of a U.S. steel plant project, this protectionist policy was abolished. A new management
was appointed and a strict restructuring plan was implemented. This plan aimed at focusing on
the holdings’ core competencies. The result were layoﬀs due to plant closures and downsizing,
particularly in the steel industry.
To mitigate the labor market problems in the concerned regions the Austrian government
enacted a law that extended UB-entitlement to 209 weeks for a speciﬁc subgroup. An unem-
ployed worker became eligible to 209 weeks of UB if he or she satisﬁed, at the beginning of his
or her unemployment spell, each of the following criteria: (i) age 50 or older; (ii) a continuous
work history (780 employment weeks during the last 25 years prior to the current unemploy-
ment spell); (iii) location of residence in one of 28 selected labor market districts since at least
6 months prior to the claim; and (iv) start of a new unemployment spell after June 1988 or
spell in progress in June 1988. The REBP was initially expected to be in eﬀect until December
1991. However, the Austrian parliament decided at the end of 1991 to extend the program until
August 1993 when it was eventually abolished.
The minister for social aﬀairs, a member of the ruling party SP¨O, was in charge of selecting
those regions that became eligible to the program. Records of the meetings in which the set of
regions eligible to the program was decided are not open to the public. However, Lalive and
Zweim¨uller (2004a) show that eligible regions were characterized by a strong concentration of
employment in the steel sector and that there are no diﬀerences between regions in terms of
unemployment. These two facts support an explanation that the program was targeted towards
5

regions with a relatively high share of employment in the steel sector rather than towards
regions with high structural unemployment. Note that except for the REBP, all other labor
market institutions do not diﬀer across regions.
This discussion implies, ﬁrst, that it might be diﬃcult to draw reliable evidence on the
eﬀect of REBP from a global comparison of treated and control regions because these regions
are characterized by a diﬀerent industry structure. However, a local comparison at the border
between treated and control regions can be quite informative if communities located on both
sides of the border are similar in terms of industry and age structure. Second, it is clear that
individuals entering unemployment from a job in the steel industry were not only facing a
diﬀerent unemployment insurance regime but were aﬀected by the restructuring of the steel
sector. Thus it is very diﬃcult to isolate the eﬀects of extended beneﬁts on unemployment
duration in the non-steel inﬂow. This paper therefore proposes to focus on the non-steel inﬂow.
Note that more than 80 % of all job seekers were not previously employed in the steel sector.
This means that concentrating on the non-steel inﬂow allows identifying the eﬀects of extended
beneﬁts on an important sub-sample of the entire unemployment inﬂow.
Early Retirement Rules: Austrian social security legislation provides for regular old age
pensions at age 65 for men and age 60 for women. Pension beneﬁts depend on contributions
to the pension system in the 156 months (13 years) prior to leaving the labor force, and on the
total number of months contributed to the pension system.
There are two early retirement pathways available at age 60 for men and at age 55 for women.
The ﬁrst is provided for individuals who have a long contribution history, that is, worked for at
least 420 months (35 years) prior to claiming early retirement. Also, individuals applying for
this early retirement option must have worked for at least 2 out of the previous 3 years before
entering early retirement. The second early retirement option is available to individuals who
have spent at least 12 out of the previous 15 months claiming unemployment beneﬁts, post-UB
transfers, or special income support.
A third measure aﬀecting older workers is Sonderunterst¨utzung (special income support).
This measure was originally created in January 1974 to support individuals in the mining sector
who were permanently displaced just prior to becoming eligible for early retirement. The special
income support program provides beneﬁts for at most one year; beneﬁts are 25 % higher than
unemployment beneﬁts capped from above by the pension beneﬁt the individual is expected to
receive from the pension system. In 1979, the system was extended to cover all men aged 59 years
or older and women aged 54 years or older, provided they had contributed to the pension system
for at least 15 out of the previous 25 years. Note that the previous contribution requirement for
6

the special income support is identical to the contribution requirement for REBP.
Hypotheses: The eﬀects of the REBP for men can be analyzed in the standard job search
framework where job seekers receive unemployment beneﬁts as long as they have not exhausted
the potential beneﬁt duration. Thereafter job seekers are eligible for reduced social assistance
transfers.
Mortensen (1977) argues that extending the potential beneﬁt duration in such a
system tends to reduce the transition rate to regular jobs because it postpones the exhaustion
of regular unemployment beneﬁts.6
This reduction in the unemployment exit rate leads to
prolonged unemployment duration.
In contrast to men, women have access to special income support once unemployment beneﬁts
have been exhausted. This means that in contrast to the standard job search model, eligible
women are facing an upward sloping time path of beneﬁts discouraging job search strongly.7
Thus, REBP is expected to prolong unemployment duration much more strongly for women
than for men.
Moreover, ﬁrms and workers may even use REBP to change their early retirement strategies.
Laying oﬀan older worker who is unproductive but has been employed with the ﬁrm for a long
period damages the reputation of the ﬁrm. In contrast, oﬀering this worker an early retirement
option is a way to end the employment relationship without damaging one’s reputation among
on-going jobs. Thus, providing early retirement is an attractive option for ﬁrms who want to
keep a reputation as a long-term employer but also desire to end employment relationships that
are marginally unproductive. In general, ﬁnancing early retirement is costly. However, since
REBP replaces at least 40 % of previous income, this strategy becomes attractive for ﬁrms
who expect signiﬁcant savings from ending an employment relationship but do not want to be
perceived as reneging on a promise of long-term employment. They merely need to provide
severance pay to top oﬀunemployment beneﬁts in order to reach the level of a regular old
age pension.
Analyzing unemployment duration is informative on the extent to which such
agreements may have taken place.
Women with access to an early retirement package are
certain not to leave unemployment until they reach age 54 (special income support program
starts; income while unemployed is lower than special income support) or age 55 (regular early
retirement program starts; income while unemployed is higher than special income support).
This means that the duration of unemployment among eligible women with an early retirement
option is a monotonically decreasing function of the time from age at entry into unemployment
to age 54/55 years.
6Lalive et al. (2006) ﬁnd that this is indeed the case for small beneﬁt extensions.
7These predictions have been recently developed in the standard job search model (Hairault et al., 2006).
7

3
Data
To assess the impact of beneﬁt duration and early retirement rules on the duration of unem-
ployment spells, I use longitudinal individual data from two diﬀerent sources: (i) the Austrian
social security database (ASSD) which contains detailed information on the individuals’ age,
employment, unemployment and earnings history since the year 1972, and some information
on the employer like region and industry aﬃliation; and (ii) the Austrian unemployment reg-
ister (AUR) from which I get information on the place of residence (community) and relevant
socio-economic characteristics. The data cover the universe of the unemployment inﬂow over
the period 1986 to 1995. The corresponding spells are followed up until the end of 1998.
Unemployment duration is measured in weeks registered at the unemployment oﬃce. There
are two important issues with analyzing unemployment duration. First, changes in beneﬁt du-
ration may aﬀect weeks of registered unemployment in a purely mechanical way if all individuals
are deregistered once unemployment beneﬁts have lapsed. We investigate the sensitivity of our
results to measuring time in the unemployment register by also analyzing the time from regis-
tering at the unemployment insurance oﬃce until the next job starts.8 Our main ﬁnding is that
the results are not aﬀected by the type of duration measure used in a quantitatively important
manner. Second, note that average unemployment duration is not aﬀected by right censoring
because spells are observed until the end of 1998. Thus, fewer than 1% of all unemployment
spells are right censored in the data.
The empirical analysis extracts information on individuals entering unemployment from a job
in the non-steel sector in the time period 1/1986 until 12/1987 (before REBP) and in the time
period 8/1989 until 7/1991 (during REBP). The ﬁrst time period covers the situation before
REBP was introduced.
We restrict attention to the period after January 1986 because the
Austrian unemployment register only started in 1986. Moreover, we do not include information
on the period 1/1988 until 5/1988 because spells starting in this time period may already be
aﬀected by REBP.9 The ’during REBP’ time period covers the longest possible time period
where REBP is introduced but no other changes in beneﬁt entitlement take place.
(Recall
that the maximum unemployment duration was changed as of August 1989.) Furthermore, the
analysis disregards the fourth quarter inﬂow into unemployment in the year 1991 because Lalive
and Zweim¨uller (2004a) show that the inﬂow into unemployment was very strongly aﬀected just
8If time to job exceeds 209 weeks (because there is no information on the next job in the data) we censor time
to next job at 209 weeks.
9Note that ongoing spells are aﬀected by REBP. However, once a job seeker has exhausted regular unemploy-
ment beneﬁts he or she is no longer eligible for REBP. Since the potential beneﬁt duration was at most 30 weeks
prior to REBP, this sample selection ensures that REBP does not aﬀect the ’before REBP’ analysis strongly.
8

prior to the end of 1991.10
The analysis furthermore focuses on individuals with a ’continuous’ work history. Eligibility
for REBP (and special income support) requires 780 employment weeks (15 years) within the
last 25 years – an actual-to-potential experience ratio of at least 0.6. Since the Austrian social
security database only contains information as of January 1, 1972, we can observe at most 19.5
years prior to entry into unemployment on average. In order to keep possible misclassiﬁcation
low, a continuous work history is deﬁned as a career with a ratio of actual to potential work
experience (henceforth previous experience) since the year 1972 of at least 0.7. This ensures
that only workers who satisfy the work experience requirement with a very high probability are
included in the sample.11
The data contain information on the month and year of birth, and month and year of entry
into unemployment. This allows calculating the age at entry into unemployment by counting
the number of years and months of a persons life completed before entering unemployment.
For instance, a job seeker born in June 1940 who is entering unemployment in May 1990 is
aged 49 years and 11 months. In contrast, a job seeker born in the same month but entering
unemployment in June 1990 is aged 50 years and 0 months.12 The empirical analysis restricts
attention to individuals aged 46 years to 53 years (and 11 months) at the beginning of the
unemployment spell. This is the only age bracket where both women and men do not have
access to early retirement on the ﬁrst day of the unemployment spell. Second, because age is
only recorded up to a precision of one month, we allow for clustering of the regression errors at
the age cell level to account for possible speciﬁcation error as suggested in Card and Lee (2006).
The second identiﬁcation strategy identiﬁes the eﬀect of REBP at the border between treated
and control regions.13 Figure 1 shows the distribution of REBP across the 2361 communities
in Austria. Interestingly, the treated regions (communities with blue shading) were all located
10Arguably, this can be rationalized by the fact that it was not certain whether REBP would be extended.
Firms and workers therefore had a strong incentive to make use of the generous unemployment insurance rules
provided by REBP.
11The data contain information on employment dating back to the late 1940s for about 30 % of all individuals
(REV Daten). This information can be used to assess the quality of the threshold rule used in the empirical
analysis. Findings indicate that 61 % of all job seekers with an actual to potential experience ratio of .6 to .7
actually fulﬁll the 15 out of 25 years requirement. The corresponding ﬁgure is 81 % for job seekers with a ratio
of .7 to .8, it is 94 % for job seekers with a ratio of .8 to .9, and it is 99 % for job seekers with a ratio of .9 to
1. This suggests that the .7 threshold is successful in identifying eligible individuals (the average probability of
being eligible exceeds 94 %). Note, however, that we can not concentrate on the sub-sample of individuals with
REV information since this sub-sample is not a random draw from the unemployment inﬂow.
12Note that this job seeker may have been born on June 30, 1940 but entered unemployment on June 1, 1990
missing almost one month to her or his 50th birthday. Results strongly suggest that this person was nevertheless
eligible for REBP (see Figure 2).
Arguably, this can be explained by the fact that the caseworkers in the
unemployment insurance oﬃce only consider month and year of birth and unemployment entry when assessing a
claimant’s eligibility status.
13See Holmes (2005) and Hoxby (2000) for important geography based analyses in urban economics and the
economics of education.
9

on a contiguous area located in the Eastern part of Austria and stretching from the North-
ern border to the Southern border. The program covers parts of the provinces Burgenland,
Carinthia (K¨arnten), Lower Austria (Nieder¨osterreich), Upper Austria (Ober¨osterreich), and
Styria (Steiermark).
Figure 1 about here
It is crucial to measure the distance of each community to the border between treated and
control regions. Figure 1 shows that communities which appear to be located close to the border
on the map need not be close in economic terms because they are separated by mountainous
terrain (for instance in the Alpine center of Austria). We therefore use a measure that reﬂects
travel time – an economically more relevant measure of distance between locations than air
distance. Speciﬁcally, the distance to the border of community A is the number of minutes it
takes to drive a car from a community across the border, i.e. to the closest community that is
located on the other side of the border.14 This travel distance measure is superior to using air
distance between communities because it accounts for possible geographic barriers (mountains,
rivers) between communities that look adjacent on a map. The minimal distance from a commu-
nity in the treated region to the nearest control region community is 5 minutes. We normalize
travel distance from this treated community to the border to be zero because this community
is, eﬀectively, located exactly on the border between treated and control communities.15
For control region communities we perform the same calculation with the only diﬀerence that
we record the negative of the travel distance by car. Thus non-negative values of the distance
to border variable refer to treated communities. Negative values of the distance to border refer
to control communities. The analysis identiﬁes the eﬀect of REBP on unemployment duration
at the border between treated and control communities, i.e. at zero minutes distance to border.
The empirical analysis restricts attention to individuals living no farther than a 70 minutes
car drive from the border because the density of the inﬂow into unemployment is very low
in communities located further than 70 minutes car distance from the border. Furthermore,
we also exclude unemployment spells that start in Vienna (a control region city located at 33
minutes from the border between treated and control regions) because Vienna is a very dominant
community characterized by long unemployment duration.
14The distance measure reﬂects the time required to drive from the center of community A to the center of
the community on the other side of the border using the fastest road connection between these two communities
under normal conditions. We obtained this information in 2000 from a commercial provider of rout planning
software in Austria (DDS Digital Services). Note that the travel distance by car measured in this paper may
not properly reﬂect the travel distance at the beginning of the 1990s. Nevertheless, we believe that this measure
of travel distance is likely to contain important information on the geographic distance between communities
because there were no major changes to road infrastructure.
15Speciﬁcally, we subtract 5 minutes travel distance from each treated region community’s distance to the
border between regions.
10

The key issue in terms of identiﬁcation is the location of steel plants in terms of distance to
the border between treated and control regions. Even though the analysis focuses on the non-
steel inﬂow, the steel restructuring operations may spill over to other industries. There are two
main channels for spillovers. First, industries that are supplying materials to the steel industry
can be aﬀected. Second, the reduction in steel worker incomes may spill over to other industries
via reduced demand for goods. The national steel holding’s two largest plants are located in the
city of Linz (Upper Austria), and Donawitz, located near the city of Leoben (Styria). Our data
indicates that it takes 24 minutes to drive from the city of Linz to the border between treated
and control regions. The distance from Donawitz to the border is even longer – 34 minutes.
Arguably, this suggests that spillovers from steel do not aﬀect estimates of the eﬀect of REBP
at the border between treated and control regions.16
Table 1 reports key background statistics on the job seekers entering unemployment from a
job in the non-steel sector in the time during REBP (8/1989-7/1991), by gender, age and region
of residence.17
Table 1 about here
Table 1 indicates that there are 4759 treated male individuals, that is individuals aged 50-53
years, living in treated regions (Panel A, Column 1). Average age is slightly lower than 52 years
reﬂecting the fact that the inﬂow is concentrated somewhat among individuals closer to the
50 year threshold. On average, treated individuals live about a 28 minutes car drive from the
border between treated and control regions. About 83 % of all men who enter unemployment
are married, and about 48 % of the job seekers were previously employed in construction.18
Table 1 shows that there are 4975 men starting an unemployment spell also in treated
regions but aged 46-49 years (Panel A, Column 2). Clearly, average age (48 years) in this group
is lower than in the group of treated individuals. However, this ﬁrst control group appears to
be living at roughly similar distance to the border between treated and control regions and
the younger group of job seekers living in treated regions is quite comparable to the eligible
older group of job seekers in terms of the family situation. In the control communities, there
are 8537 men entering unemployment in the age group 50-53 years (Table 1, Panel A, Column
3).19 Average age for control region job seekers is identical to treated individuals. However,
16Note that spillovers from steel are unlikely to bias the identiﬁcation strategy at the age 50 years threshold
because these spillovers aﬀect both job seekers similarly on both sides of the threshold.
17These control variables are used in the empirical analysis. In addition, the empirical analysis uses information
on family situation, education, nationality, wage in previous job, skill level (white collar vs. blue collar), and
previous industry to control for possible diﬀerences between treated and control spells.
18Note that the high share of construction workers in the unemployment inﬂow reﬂects strong seasonal unem-
ployment in the construction sector rather than the relative size of this sector compared to other sectors.
19The inﬂow into unemployment is larger in the control regions than in treated regions because more people
11

these individuals are living on average 39 minutes from the border between treated and control
regions. This indicates that the average control individual is living in a community that could be
quite diﬀerent due to geographic location from the community of the average treated individual.
Indeed, the construction sector inﬂow is much larger in control regions (60 %) than in treated
regions (48 %). This suggests paying particular attention to how the construction share changes
when approaching the border between treated and control regions. With respect to the family
situation job seekers in control regions (82 % are married) are similar to job seekers in treated
regions (83 % are married).
There are 3466 women entering unemployment who satisfy both the age and region of res-
idence requirement for REBP (Table 1 Panel B Column 1). The average age among women is
51.5 years; about .3 years lower than the average age among treated men. This could be due
to the fact that REBP might have been more relevant among women near the age 50 threshold
compared to men. Second, about 78 % of all eligible women are married and about 3 % of these
women were previously employed in the construction sector.
Table 1 reports descriptive statistics on the two control groups for women (Panel B Columns
2 and 3). There are 2193 women entering unemployment in the age bracket 46-49 years in the
period with REBP in treated regions (Panel B Column 2). The family situation of the job
seekers who fail the age requirement is quite diﬀerent from the eligible group of job seekers.
Whereas 78 % of the eligible women are married, only 70 % of the women below the age 50
threshold are married. In terms of identiﬁcation, it is important to see whether this diﬀerence
occurs at the age threshold. The second control group comprises the 3625 women who do not
live in treated regions but satisfy the age requirement (Panel B Column 3). Note that average
age in this group is 51.9 which is slightly higher than the average age in the treated group is
51.5 years. Moreover, the fraction married in the control group is again somewhat lower (72 %)
than in the treated group (78 %).
4
Descriptive Evidence on the Eﬀects of REBP
This section reports descriptive evidence on the eﬀects of REBP on unemployment duration,
on the eﬀects of age and distance to border before REBP was introduced, and on the eﬀects of
REBP on inﬂow composition and on inﬂow size.
Results for Men: Figure 2 reports descriptive evidence on the eﬀect of REBP on average
unemployment duration among men.
Figure 2 about here
live and work in control region communities than in treated regions.
12

Figure 2 reports average unemployment duration by age at entry into unemployment for
each age quarter from 46 years and 1 quarter to 53 years and 4 quarters. The evidence is based
on 9734 individuals living in treated regions, i.e. 4759 treated individuals aged 50 years and
older and 4975 control individuals aged 46 to 49 years. All ﬁgures superimpose the ﬁt of a linear
regression allowing for a discontinuity at the threshold and linear trends in the assignment
variable (age or distance to border) on both sides of the threshold (see section 5 for further
discussion on estimation).
Control individuals remain unemployed for 13 weeks on average. In contrast, average unem-
ployment duration exceeds 26 weeks in almost all age cells for individuals aged 50 years or older.
There is a signiﬁcant discontinuity in average unemployment duration that occurs between indi-
viduals aged 49 years and 4 quarters and individuals aged 50 years and 1 quarter. This suggests
that there is a strong eﬀect of REBP on the average duration of unemployment spells.
Figure 3 about here
Figure 3 identiﬁes the eﬀect of REBP by comparing individuals living on both sides of the
border between treated and control regions. This ﬁgure is based on 13296 individuals who are
50 years or older at the beginning of their unemployment spell, i.e. the 4759 treated individuals
(who live in treated regions) and the 8537 control individuals (who live in control regions).20
Average unemployment duration is roughly 13 weeks in the control regions (negative values of
distance to border). Furthermore, unemployment duration appears to decrease slightly when
approaching the border between treated and control regions. In contrast, as soon as we enter
the the treated region, average unemployment duration increases signiﬁcantly to more than 26
weeks.
This suggests, again, that REBP strongly increases average unemployment duration
among men living close to the border between treated and control regions. In line with control
regions, there is a negative relationship between average unemployment duration and distance
to border in treated regions.
The evidence in Figures 2 and 3 suggest that there are important discontinuities in the
duration of unemployment at age 50 and at the border between treated and control regions.
Have these discontinuities been caused by REBP? This is true only if the counterfactual average
20The ﬁgure reports average unemployment duration for each distance to border cell of width 5 minutes, i.e.
the ﬁrst cell reporting average unemployment duration in communities located 65-69 minutes from the border
between treated and control regions (-67.6 minutes), the second cell reporting evidence for communities at 60-64
minutes distance (-62.5 minutes), ..., and the last cell reporting evidence for the community located 55 to 69
minutes from the border (62.5 minutes). Note that the cells at distance 10 to 14 minutes, 5 to 9 minutes to the
border from the control region side, and the cells 0 to 4 minutes, and 5 to 9 minutes distance to the border on the
treated region side are aggregated because the cells close to the border are based on fewer than 150 spells. For
the same reason, the descriptive analysis aggregates the cells 55-59 minutes, 60-64 minutes, and 65-69 minutes
distance to border into one cell. Note, however, that the econometric analysis is based on the continuous distance
to border measure.
13

duration without REBP varies smoothly with age and distance to border. In particular, jumps
in unemployment duration at age 50 and at the border that occur for reasons other than beneﬁt
eligibility have to be ruled out. I therefore investigate whether average duration of unemployment
varies smoothly before REBP was introduced. Figure 4 reports average unemployment duration
as a function of age and distance to border in the period from 1/1986 until 12/1987, i.e. 2.5
years to .5 years before REBP was introduced.
Figure 4 about here
Figure 4A reports the eﬀects of age on unemployment duration. Men who are 46 years old
remain unemployed for about 13 weeks on average. As age increases, so does average unem-
ployment duration. Men who are 53 years old when registering at the unemployment oﬃce are
expected to be unemployed for about 16 weeks. Importantly, there are some diﬀerences in terms
of average unemployment duration at the age 50 threshold. Men who are in the age bracket 49
years and 4 quarters are unemployed for roughly 14 weeks. In contrast, men who have just cele-
brated their 50th birthday remain unemployed for 17 weeks on average, and the linear regression
suggests that this diﬀerence is statistically signiﬁcant. This evidence thus suggests that it may
be important to account for pre-existing diﬀerences in average unemployment duration at the
age 50 years threshold.
Figure 4B assesses how average unemployment duration varies with distance to border.
Before REBP, average unemployment duration is about 13 weeks in control region communities
at 70 minutes distance to the border. Duration of job search increases monotonically from less
than 13 weeks to about 20 weeks when approaching the border between treated and control
regions. Importantly, there is no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in average unemployment duration on
both sides of the border. The evidence in Figure 4B thus suggests that identifying the eﬀect of
REBP by contrasting average unemployment duration in communities located at both sides of
the border is a meaningful identiﬁcation strategy.
For this identiﬁcation strategy to be valid, however, the composition of the inﬂow pool
needs to be balanced at the age and border threshold in the period with REBP. Two important
characteristics are marital status and previous employment in construction. Marital status is
important primarily because it is related to the potential level of the social assistance transfers.
The idea is that married individuals are more likely to live with a working spouse.
Since
means testing focuses on household rather than individual income, the likelihood that married
individuals will receive social assistance is lower. This suggests that married individuals remain
unemployed shorter than non-married individuals all else equal. Construction employment is
important because it proxies for seasonal unemployment which reﬂects unemployment due to
14

a temporary rather than a permanent layoﬀ. Table 1 presents descriptive statistics on these
important background characteristics and shows that the share married is not balanced with
respect to age and the construction share is not balanced between treated and control regions.
Figure 5 therefore assesses how the composition of the inﬂow into unemployment varies with
age and distance to border.
Figure 5 about here
Focusing on men entering unemployment in treated regions in the age bracket 45-53 years,
Figure 5A reveals that marital status indeed appears to be correlated with age. In the age
bracket 46-48 years, the share married increases from about 75 % to about 80 %. Importantly,
there is no discontinuity at the age 50 threshold. Roughly 80 % of all job seekers who are aged
50 years and 1 quarter are married. The share married increases from 80 % to about 86 % in
the age bracket 50 to 53.
Figure 5B discusses inﬂow composition with respect to previous employment in construc-
tion as a function of distance to border. In control regions, the share previously employed in
construction is about 60 % irrespective of distance to the border between treated and control
regions. Just on the other side of the border, the share previously employed in construction
decreases quite strongly but insigniﬁcantly to 53 %. The share previously employed in con-
struction decreases further as distance to border increases and reaches a level of less than 40
% in communities located at distance 40 minutes to the border. Moving further away from the
border, we ﬁnd that the construction share increases again to about 50 %.
A ﬁnal concern with the identiﬁcation strategy refers to how likely it is that ﬁrms and
individuals manipulate their location on either side of the threshold. While it is clearly diﬃcult
to manipulate one’s age, it is very well possible that ﬁrms and individuals can manipulate the
age at entry into unemployment. Figure 6 therefore assesses whether the relative size of the
inﬂow into unemployment is aﬀected by the REBP.21
Figure 6 about here
Figure 6A reports relative inﬂow for the age based identiﬁcation strategy among men. Rel-
ative inﬂow is the likelihood ratio of age, i.e. the ratio of the density of age in treated regions
21It would be desirable to report the unemployment inﬂow rate, that is, the number of spells entering unem-
ployment relative to employment. Our employment data, however, are based on the location of the previous
employer rather than of the location of the individual’s residence. This means that it is not possible to calculate
unemployment risk appropriately. Note that relative inﬂow is, however, informative on inﬂow risk (unemployment
inﬂow divided by employment) if the age structure of employment is identical in treated and control regions up
to a constant.
15

to the density of age in control regions.22 Figure 6A indicates that the likelihood ratio is close
to 1 throughout the entire support suggesting that there is no concentration of the inﬂow at a
particular age bracket. This suggests that manipulation of the age at entry into unemployment
does not occur among men.
Figure 6B reports relative inﬂow for the border based identiﬁcation strategy. Relative inﬂow
is the likelihood ratio of distance to border, i.e. the ratio between the density of distance to
border in the age bracket 50-53 years to the density of distance to border in the age bracket
46-49 years. In control communities, relative inﬂow is 1 indicating that the number of older
workers entering unemployment is almost identical to the number of younger workers. Relative
inﬂow is also close to 1 in treated communities located no farther than 30 minutes from the
border. Relative inﬂow becomes more noisy in communities located 35 minutes and more from
the border reﬂecting the fact that these distance to border cells are relatively small. Again,
there appears to be no manipulation of location of residence.
Results for Women: Figure 7 concentrates on women entering unemployment in treated
regions in the age bracket 46 to 53 years and it displays three striking facts.23 First, there is a
very salient increase in unemployment duration at the age 50 threshold. Whereas the women who
are slightly younger than the threshold leave unemployment on average after about 16 weeks,
women who are slightly older than the threshold do not exit unemployment for more than 130
weeks on average. Thus, there appears to be a strongly signiﬁcant increase in unemployment
duration by at least 110 weeks. Second, in the age bracket 50 to 53 years, there is a very strong
decrease in average unemployment duration from more than 130 weeks (age 50 years and 1
quarter) to less than 52 weeks (ag