university of copenhagen 
Københavns Universitet
Family Health Behaviors
Fadlon, Itzik; Nielsen, Torben Heien
Published in:
American Economic Review
DOI:
10.1257/aer.20171993
Publication date:
2019
Document version
Publisher's PDF, also known as Version of record
Document license:
Other
Citation for published version (APA):
Fadlon, I., & Nielsen, T. H. (2019). Family Health Behaviors. American Economic Review, 109(9), 3162-3191.
https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20171993
Download date: 30. Mar. 2026

American Economic Review 2019, 109(9): 3162–3191 
https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20171993
3162
Family Health Behaviors†
By Itzik Fadlon and Torben Heien Nielsen*
We study how health behaviors are shaped through family spillovers. 
We leverage administrative data to identify the effects of health 
shocks on family members’ consumption of preventive care and 
­health-related behaviors, constructing counterfactuals for affected 
households using households that experience the same shock but 
a few years in the future. Spouses and adult children immediately 
improve their health behaviors and their responses are both signif-
icant and persistent. These spillovers are ­far-reaching as they cas-
cade even to coworkers. While some responses are consistent with 
learning information about one’s own health, the evidence points to 
salience as a major operative explanation. (JEL D15, D83, I12, J12)
Health behaviors, broadly defined as any action, investment, or consumption 
choice that can affect health and mortality risk, are a key input in the production of 
individuals’ health (McGinnis and Foege 1993; Mokdad et al. 2004; Cutler, Glaeser, 
and Rosen 2009). These behaviors take a variety of forms including both adverse 
habits, such as smoking and drinking, and positive actions, such as the consumption 
of ­risk-reducing preventive care. The importance of identifying what determines 
­health-related behaviors, which are notorious for being hard to change, has led to 
an active literature on a range of potential factors, with some particular focus on 
financial incentives and health education.1 Still, we lack a clear understanding of 
the channels through which health behaviors and habits evolve over the life cycle.
A long tradition of economic research has underscored the importance of family 
interactions in determining individual behavior, particularly in the context of con-
sumption and labor supply choices (Becker 1991; Browning, Chiappori, and Weiss 
1 Cutler (2004) and Cawley and Ruhm (2011) offer reviews for developed economies, and Kremer and 
Glennerster (2011) review evidence from randomized evaluations in developing countries.
* Fadlon: Department of Economics, University of California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive #0508, La Jolla, 
CA 92093, and NBER (email: fadlon@ucsd.edu); Nielsen: Department of Economics, University of Copenhagen, 
Øster Farimagsgade 5 Building 26, DK-1353, Copenhagen K, and CEBI (email: thn@econ.ku.dk). Esther Duflo 
was the coeditor for this article. We thank Jeffrey Clemens, Julie Cullen, David Cutler, Gordon Dahl, Esther Duflo, 
Amy Finkelstein, Søren Leth-Petersen, Karthik Muralidharan, Jonathan Skinner, and two anonymous referees 
for valuable comments and suggestions, as well as seminar participants at UCSD, Stanford, RAND, University 
of Chicago, University of Copenhagen, University of Southern Denmark, RFF, IHEA Annual Congress, NBER 
Cohort Studies Meeting, CEPRA/NBER Workshop on Aging and Health, and the 2016 NBER Summer Institute 
for helpful comments and discussions. Jonathan Leganza provided excellent research assistance. We gratefully 
acknowledge funding from the Economic Policy Research Network (EPRN) and Novo Nordisk Foundation (grant 
no. NNF17OC0026542). The activities of the Center for Economic Behavior and Inequality (CEBI) are financed 
by the Danish National Research Foundation. The authors declare that they have no relevant or material financial 
interests that relate to the research described in this paper.
† Go to https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20171993 to visit the article page for additional materials and author 
disclosure statement(s).

3163
FADLON AND NIELSEN: FAMILY HEALTH BEHAVIORS
VOL. 109 NO. 9
2014). Similarly, there could be a role for the family in forming health behaviors, 
via the flow of information, awareness, and the creation of habits and norms.2 Yet, 
identifying causal relationships of family spillovers that can affect health behaviors 
is challenging due to the possibility of correlated unobservables across and within 
generations of the family.3 Moreover, it requires large datasets on health and con-
sumption of health care with linkages across family members.
In this paper, we study how family spillovers, both within and across generations, 
shape health behaviors over the natural course of the life cycle. Specifically, we 
estimate the causal effects of health shocks to individuals on their family members’ 
consumption of preventive care and ­health-related behaviors, focusing on spouses 
and adult children. Our estimation strategy relies on the timing of shocks, construct-
ing counterfactuals for affected households using households that experience the 
same shock but a few years in the future. We leverage a long panel of administrative 
data, which covers the entire adult Danish population from the years 1980–2011 and 
includes medication prescriptions, contacts with ­medical care professionals, inpa-
tient and outpatient hospitalizations, and death records. An important advantage of 
our setting is the ability to link across different family and social connections, which 
enables us to investigate the scope of spillovers within one’s network.
We begin by documenting the importance of spillovers in health behaviors. 
Our primary empirical setting is the effects of ­nonfatal heart attacks and strokes, 
which are commonly studied as sudden and severe events whose particular timing 
is likely unpredictable (see, e.g., Chandra and Staiger 2007, Doyle 2011). In the 
context of these health shocks, we study as our main outcome the consumption of 
the ­cholesterol-lowering medication statin, a class of dise­ase-specific ­risk-reducing 
preventive care that is among the most widely prescribed medications in the devel-
oped world (Redberg and Katz 2016).
Our findings identify intra- and ­inter-generational family spillovers as a prevalent 
causal channel through which health behaviors evolve. Spouses and adult children 
immediately increase their health investments and improve their health behaviors 
in response to shocks. We show that these effects are economically significant and 
exhibit a high degree of persistence: by the end of our analysis horizon of four years, 
the impact of the family shock on the consumption of preventive care amounts to 
an increase of 15 percent among ­prime-age spouses and to increases of 37 percent 
and 16 percent among younger and older adult children, respectively. We further 
find that these spillovers in health care consumption are ­far reaching across one’s 
network with a meaningful implied multiplier, as they cascade even to coworkers, 
who exhibit ­long-lasting responses of the same order of magnitude as spouses.
In support of these findings, we provide additional analysis of spillovers in behav-
iors within a complementary setting of fatal events, focusing on spouses. We show 
that fatal family events lead to considerable behavioral improvements in the form of 
2 A series of papers documents correlations among peers and family members, mostly across spouses, in a 
variety of ­health-related behaviors (as reviewed in, e.g., Meyler, Stimpson, and Peek 2007 and Cawley and Ruhm 
2011).
3 Some interesting recent studies aim to address this challenge. Cutler and Glaeser (2010) exploit smoking bans 
at the workplace to study spousal smoking behavior; Fletcher and Marksteiner (2017) analyze spouses’ behavior 
in clinical interventions to reduce individuals’ smoking and alcohol consumption; and Cawley et al. (2017) study 
effects across siblings in weight and obesity by instrumenting for a sibling’s obesity using genetic risk scores.

3164
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
SEPTEMBER 2019
decreases in key harmful habits (smoking and usage of prescription opioids), as well 
as to increases in general awareness regarding own health.4
In the second part of the paper, we investigate the mechanisms by which shocks 
can trigger the changes in health behaviors that we identified among family and 
network members. We offer various tests to distinguish between two major classes 
of mechanisms: learning new information about one’s own health risks, and the 
salience of health shocks itself. Our focus on these channels is guided by the liter-
ature and the empirical patterns; of course, alternative mechanisms could also be at 
play, some of which we show can be likely ruled out.
We find some evidence in support of learning as an explanation. We show that 
spouses across predictable risk types are similarly prompted to seek information 
about their own cardiovascular risk (via medical testing), but that those with higher 
baseline risk end up having larger statin responses. We additionally show that 
spouses in couples with more similar risk profiles, who are presumably more likely 
to learn from the shock about their own health risks, exhibit stronger responses in 
preventive behaviors. Likewise, as premature parental cardiovascular shocks carry 
more information on a child’s biological risk (De Backer et al. 2003, Pencina et al. 
2014), we find that children whose parents were younger at the time of shock are 
more likely to increase their consumption of statins as preventive care.
More so, there is consistent evidence in support of salience as a key operative 
channel. We exploit the richness of the data to provide three sets of supportive find-
ings. First, we study settings with distinctly limited scope for learning new infor-
mation. We show similarly large increases in the consumption of statins by spouses 
who had been tested for cholesterol levels in the ­pre-shock period and hence had 
already gained access to the information relevant for their cardiovascular risk. We 
also provide various examples within our complementary application of spousal 
death, where the exact nature of the event is unlikely to reveal new information.
Second, we show that family members’ attention is particularly drawn to the local 
nature of the health event, so their behavioral responses target the domain of the 
specific experienced risk. Individuals whose spouse died of cancer, as compared to 
any other cause, significantly increase their expenditure on diagnostic radiologists, 
who specialize in screening for major types of cancer. Importantly, we find simi-
lar responses in the case of husbands whose wives died of female cancers, where 
the spouse’s cancer type is not likely informative of own cancer risk. We further 
show that the behavioral changes are local to the vicinity of the experienced risk’s 
domain by studying ­cross-condition responses. Interestingly, in the context of fatal 
cancer, we find some evidence of declines in spouses’ consumption of preventive 
care against cardiovascular disease. Consistent with the notion of limited attention, 
this result raises the possibility of crowd out. Namely, it is not only that individuals 
increase their ­take-up of preventive care specific to the family health event, even in 
cases that are likely uninformative, but they may also reduce their ­take-up of preven-
tive care that pertains to other, ­non-salient health risks.
4 Existing related work studies quality of care and health behaviors following spousal bereavement, mainly 
to test whether they can account for corresponding declines in health (see, e.g., a review in Stahl and Schulz 
2014). These papers use designs different from ours and generally compare outcomes before and after bereavement 
or compare widowed to ­non-widowed individuals. In contrast to our analysis, their comparisons mostly find no 
changes or some declines in quality of care or in healthy behaviors, where an exception is Jin and Christakis (2009).

3165
FADLON AND NIELSEN: FAMILY HEALTH BEHAVIORS
VOL. 109 NO. 9
Third, we utilize circles in one’s network that are purely social to investigate 
the role of the degree of exposure to the shock and its prominence, by exploiting 
various measures of “distance.” We show that sons- and daughters-in-law increase 
their ­take-up of preventive care following the parent-­in-law cardiovascular shock, 
and that, consistent with exposure intensity, this effect is driven by those who live 
closer to their ­in-laws. We also show that whereas there are meaningful spillovers 
in health care consumption among close coworkers (defined by similarities in age/
occupation), there are no such effects on socially distant coworkers.
In addition to the literature already mentioned, our findings also contribute to 
the theoretical work on ­health-related habits and choices (e.g., Grossman 1972, 
Becker and Murphy 1988, Orphanides and Zervos 1995, Laibson 2001, Bernheim 
and Rangel 2004). Our results point to a role of one’s network in ­health-related 
habit formation and underscore the importance of incorporating ­interpersonal inter-
actions across different family generations and peers in analyzing health behaviors, 
investments, and the consumption of health care. The response patterns also high-
light learning and, specifically, salience and attention as key modeling components 
(as in, e.g., DellaVigna 2009; Bordalo, Gennaioli, and Shleifer 2012, 2013; and 
Gabaix 2019),5and point to ­event-driven responses, in line with frameworks such 
as Bernheim and Rangel’s (2004) ­cue-triggered decision-making model. More gen-
erally, the results additionally advance our understanding of the nature and scope 
of broader network effects in consumption, here through the lens of health care 
utilization.6
Lastly, the findings could also have implications for policies that aim to pro-
mote population health. They emphasize that health behaviors are not immutable 
and suggest the leveraging of family events as a window of opportunity for inter-
vention, involving the required intrinsic motives for persistent behavioral changes. 
One could exploit these events to provide family members with ­individual-specific 
information on risks; or to introduce policies that leverage salience of health to 
actively offer preventive care. However, the evidence also suggests more broadly 
that salience should be used with caution as a policy tool. Agents’ attention can be 
drawn to specific risks even in the absence of relevant information, which could end 
in excessive health care consumption; and, at the same time, their attention may be 
diverted away from conditions of which they might be at higher risk.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section I we describe our 
empirical strategy. Section II outlines the data sources we use, the empirical setting, 
and the analysis sample. The evidence on spillovers in health behaviors is presented 
in Section III, and Section IV investigates their underlying mechanisms. Section V 
discusses the implications of our findings and concludes.
5 Our work is consistent with recent findings from interventions in developing economies. In their review of 
randomized evaluations that involve peer influences on health behaviors, Kremer and Glennerster (2011) argue 
that while some of the findings are potentially driven by learning, others likely reflect alternative channels such as 
salience, as in the case of the work by Zwane et al. (2011) who find that the act of being surveyed affects behavior. 
Our work is also related to the growing evidence on how limited attention and salience affect economic behavior in 
a variety of settings; see DellaVigna (2009) and Gabaix (2019) for reviews.
6 De Giorgi, Frederiksen, and Pistaferri (forthcoming) provide a brief review of the work on consumption within 
the network and study consumption network effects (analyzing total spending) by exploiting interactions between 
one’s household and coworker networks.

3166
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
SEPTEMBER 2019
I.  Research Design
The goal of our analysis is to identify the dynamic causal effects of severe health 
shocks on family members’ consumption of preventive care and ­health-related 
behaviors. In this section, we describe the empirical strategy that we use to over-
come the selection challenges inherent in the identification of these effects and state 
our estimating equation. We also outline the specifications we employ to analyze 
heterogeneity in treatment effects to shed light on the nature of spillovers and under-
lying mechanisms.
A. Primary ­Quasi-Experiment
The ideal experiment for identifying behavioral responses to family health shocks 
would randomly assign shocks to families and track responses in health behaviors 
over time. Such an experiment would compare the ­ex post responses to shocks 
by affected households to a counterfactual behavior of ­ex ante similar unaffected 
households. To approximate this ideal experiment, we utilize a ­quasi-experimental 
research design that exploits the potential randomness of the timing of a severe 
health shock within a short period of time. Specifically, we construct counterfactuals 
for affected households using households that experience the same shock but a few 
years in the future.
As such, our two experimental groups consist of a treatment group, composed 
of family members in households that experience a shock in year ​τ​, and a matched 
control group, composed of family members from the same cohorts in households 
that experience the same shock but in year ​τ + Δ​. We then recover the treatment 
effect by performing traditional event studies for these two experimental groups 
and combining them into a straightforward dynamic ­difference-in-differences esti-
mator. That is, we identify the treatment effect purely from the change in the dif-
ferences in outcomes across the two groups over time. The ­trade-off in the choice 
of ​Δ​ weighs households’ comparability (which is greater when ​Δ​ is smaller) 
against analysis horizon (which is greater when ​Δ​ is larger).7 Our choice of ​Δ​ is 
five years, such that we can identify effects up to four years after the shock (since 
the control group becomes “treated” in period ​Δ​). We assess the robustness of 
our analysis to this choice and find that local perturbations to ​Δ​ provide similar 
results.8
The identifying assumption is that, absent the realization of the shock, the out-
comes of the treatment and control groups would run parallel. The plausibility of 
this assumption relies on the notion that within the window of time of length ​Δ​, the 
particular year at which the shock occurs may be as good as random. To test the 
validity of our assumption, we accompany our empirical analysis with the treat-
ment and control groups’ behavior in the four years prior to the (actual or assigned) 
shock year (period 0) in order to assess their ­comovement in the ­pre-shock peri-
ods. We consistently show throughout the analysis that there are virtually no dif-
ferential changes in the trends of the treatment and control groups before period 0. 
7 For more details on the research design and its underlying ­trade-offs, see Fadlon and Nielsen (2017).
8 This is reported in online Appendix Table 8.

3167
FADLON AND NIELSEN: FAMILY HEALTH BEHAVIORS
VOL. 109 NO. 9
This ­validates the design and alleviates concerns that the groups may differ by, for 
example, their expectations over the particular year of the shock within our chosen 
window.
The way the control group is defined means that family members in the control 
group experience the same shock as those in the treatment group, but at a later age, 
which generates a systematic difference between the treatment and control groups. 
To address this issue, we construct as a robustness check an alternative control group 
that matches households on observable ­pre-shock risk factors. This approach expands 
the control group to a broader set of comparable households, which includes those 
who never experience the health shock despite having similar underlying risk, as 
well as those who experience the shock but within other ​Δ​ bandwidths. A detailed 
description of the matching procedure that we use is provided in online Appendix 
B. This alternative design leads to similar findings, which are reported in online 
Appendix Table 9. The remainder of this subsection formalizes the main research 
design and describes our estimator.
Formal Description of the Main Design and Estimating Equation.­—Fix a group 
of cohorts, denoted by ​Ω​, and consider estimating the treatment effect of a shock 
experienced at some point in the time interval ​[​τ​1​, ​τ​2​]​ by individuals whose fam-
ily members belong to group ​Ω​. We refer to these individuals’ family members as 
the treatment group and divide them into ­subgroups indexed by the year in which 
the shock was experienced, ​τ  ∈  ​[​τ​1​, ​τ​2​]​. We normalize the time of observation 
such that the time period, ​t​, is measured with respect to the year of the shock: that 
is, ​t  =  year − τ​, where ​year​ is the calendar year of the observation. As a control 
group, using only timing, we match to each treated group ​τ​ the family members 
(from the same cohort group ​Ω​) of individuals who experienced the same shock but 
at ​τ + Δ​, for a given choice of ​Δ​. For these households we assign a “placebo” shock 
at ​t  =  0​ by normalizing time in the same way that we do for the treatment group, 
i.e., ​t  =  year − τ​ (where, by construction, their actual shock occurs at ​t  =  Δ​).
Our estimating equation is a dynamic ­difference-in-differences specification of 
the following form:
(1) ​y​i,t​  =  α + β trea​t​i​ + ​ 
∑ 
r≠−1;r=−4
​ 
4
 
​ ​γ​r​ × ​I​r​ + ​ 
∑ 
r≠−1;r=−4
​ 
4
 
​ ​δ​r​ × ​I​r​ × trea​t​i​ + λ​X​i,t​ + ​ε​i,t​.​
In this regression, ​y​i,t​ denotes an outcome for household ​i​ at time ​t​; ​trea​t​i​ denotes 
an indicator for whether a household belongs to the treatment group; ​I​r​ are indi-
cators for time relative to the assigned shock year (actual shock for treatment and 
placebo shock for control); and ​X​i,t​ denotes a vector of potential controls. The key 
parameters of interest are ​δ​r​, which estimate the period ​r​ treatment effect (​r  >  0​) 
relative to the ­pre-period ​− 1​. Validation of the parallel trends assumption requires 
that ​δ​r​  =  0​ for all ​r  <  0​. Unless otherwise indicated, we include in ​X​i,t​ age fixed 
effects, calendar year fixed effects, gender, and education, and we report robust stan-
dard errors clustered at the household level.
To quantify mean treatment effects or for increased precision in the anal-
ysis of distant circles and smaller ­subsamples, we estimate the standard 

3168
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
SEPTEMBER 2019
­difference-in-differences equation of the following form, which averages over years 
before and after the shock:
(2)	
​y​i,t​  =  α + βtrea​t​i​ + γpos​t​i,t​ + δtrea​t​i​ × pos​t​i,t​ + λ ​X​i,t​ + ​ε​i,t​.​
In this regression, ​pos​t​i,t​ denotes an indicator for whether the observation belongs 
to ­post-shock periods. The parameter ​δ​ represents the average effect of shocks on 
family members’ outcomes.
B. Response Heterogeneity
There are two related specifications that we employ when analyzing heterogene-
ity in treatment effects to shed light on mechanisms.
Heterogeneity Specification 1.—We use the first specification when we are inter-
ested in estimating a mean baseline effect and how it varies by some dimension 
or household characteristic of interest, ​z​i​ (which can be a vector). This regression 
simply augments the baseline ­difference-in-differences model of equation (2) in the 
following way:
(3)	
​y​i,t​  =  α + βtrea​t​i​ + γpos​t​i,t​ + ​δ​i​ trea​t​i​ × pos​t​i,t​ + λ ​X​i,t​ + ​ε​i,t​,​
where
	
​δ​i​  =  ​δ​0​ + ​δ​1​ ​z​i​.​
We adjust the basic ­difference-in-differences design by allowing the treatment 
effect, ​δ​i​, to vary across households and model it as a function of the household’s 
characteristic ​z​i​. Our parameter of interest is ​δ​1​, which captures the extent to which 
the family member’s response correlates with ​z​i​.9
Heterogeneity Specification 2.—We use the second specification when we are 
interested in directly studying how responses vary by some dimension or house-
hold characteristic, ​z​i​, among treated households only. Exploiting variation within 
the treatment group, the regression that follows the dynamics of the heterogeneous 
responses around the event is of the following form:
(4)    ​y​i,t​ = α + β ​z​i​ + ​ 
∑ 
r≠−1;r=−4
​ 
4
 
​ ​γ​r​ × ​I​r​ + ​ 
∑ 
r≠−1;r=−4
​ 
4
 
​ ​δ​r​ × ​I​r​ × ​z​i​ + λ ​X​i,t​ + ​ε​i,t​.​
Equation (4) is similar to equation (1) but where ​trea​t​i​ is replaced with ​z​i​, such that 
the treatment and control groups are now defined as households with different val-
ues of ​z​i​ within the group of treated households. The key parameters of interest are ​δ​r​ 
for ​r  >  0​, which estimate how the outcomes for treated households with varying 
9 In the estimation of (3) we always include in the vector ​X​i,t​ the variables in ​z​i​ as well as their interaction 
with ​trea​t​i​ and ​pos​t​i,t​.

3169
FADLON AND NIELSEN: FAMILY HEALTH BEHAVIORS
VOL. 109 NO. 9
levels of ​z​i​ differentially evolve around the event (relative to the baseline period ​− 1​). 
The same identifying assumption is required in the analysis of these experimental 
groups, i.e., that absent the event, the outcomes of households with different values 
of ​z​i​ would run parallel. As before, an implied necessary condition is that ​δ​r​  =  0​ 
for ​r  <  0​. Lastly, the corresponding equation that estimates how responses vary on 
average across treated households with different levels of ​z​i​ takes the form
(5)	
​y​i,t​  =  α + β ​z​i​ + γpos​t​i,t​ + δ × ​z​i​ × pos​t​i,t​ + λ ​X​i,t​ + ​ε​i,t ​,​
where ​δ​ is the parameter of interest.
II.  Data, Setting, and Analysis Sample
We use administrative data on all Danish households from several registers that span 
the years 1980 to 2011. The Danish setting is a ­well-suited environment for identifying 
family spillovers in health behaviors in the context of developed economies. First, it 
provides us with the required long panel of detailed administrative health care records 
for linked family members (and other network circles). Moreover, the exact utiliza-
tion codes included in the data allow us to identify health investments and behavior 
proxies, and the large scale provides sufficient statistical power for studying different 
utilization outcomes. Second, a key institutional feature of the Danish health care sys-
tem is the provision of ­near-complete and universal health care coverage. Importantly, 
this enables us to identify effects that are not confounded by the availability of health 
insurance. Detailed institutional background is provided in online Appendix A. Below, 
we describe our data sources, empirical setting, and analysis sample.
A. Data Sources
For utilization outcomes that measure health behaviors, we use three databases 
that encompass both primary and secondary health care utilization records with 
exact dates and codes. These include (i) the Prescription Drug Database, cover-
ing all prescribed drugs that were purchased from ­1995–2011, with detailed infor-
mation on classification of medicine (using the Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical 
(ATC) classification system); (ii) the Health Insurance Registry, covering all indi-
vidual contacts with ­primary care physicians and ­medical care specialists outside 
of hospitals from ­1985–2011; and (iii) the National Patient Registry, covering all 
inpatient hospitalizations (from ­1980–2011) and outpatient hospitalizations (from 
­1994–2011), in both private and public hospitals, with detailed diagnoses (using 
the International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems 
(ICD) system).
For identifying family health events and their timing, we use hospitalization dates 
and diagnoses from the National Patient Registry, as well as the Cause of Death 
Registry which includes exact death dates and specific causes from 1980 onward. 
Lastly, we extract demographic variables such as gender, age, and level of education 
from the Integrated Database for Labor Market Research. This dataset also includes 
­register-based matches across employers and employees, from which we construct 
coworker linkages.

3170
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
SEPTEMBER 2019
All monetary values of health care expenditure are reported in nominal Danish 
kroner (DKK) deflated to 2000 prices using the consumer price index. In that year 
the exchange rate was approximately DKK 8 per US$1.
B. Empirical Setting and Analysis Sample
In our primary setting of ­nonfatal health shocks, the sample is comprised of all 
households in which an individual experienced a heart attack or a stroke for the first 
time and survived for the ­four-year analysis horizon (that corresponds to ​Δ  =  5​). 
We focus on heart attacks and strokes as our leading health events since they are 
commonly studied as sudden and severe events whose particular timing is likely 
unpredictable, and are therefore ­well suited for our empirical strategy (see, e.g., 
Chandra and Staiger 2007, Doyle 2011). These cardiovascular shocks also naturally 
fit our research question as they are directly tied to ­disease-specific ­risk-reducing 
preventive care, i.e., the ­cholesterol-lowering medication statin, the consumption 
of which we study as our main outcome. Moreover, the prevalence of these health 
shocks and of statin consumption as preventive care render this application directly 
relevant for a large share of the population.10 The main close family circles that we 
study are spouses (based on matches of all married and cohabiting couples prior to 
the shock) and their adult children (based on matches available for individuals born 
after 1960).
Our focus on ­nonfatal shocks stems from the opportunity to study a setting in 
which behavioral responses take the form of health investments; that is, of preven-
tive actions against existing underlying risks. This is because some preventive care 
can be also consumed for managing own severe health conditions and we want to 
analyze a setting in which shocks do not induce such conditions. The literature (see, 
e.g., Stroebe, Schut, and Stroebe 2007 for a review) and our own investigation show 
that death events can lead to severe health conditions, specifically among spouses. 
This is in contrast to ­nonfatal cardiovascular shocks, where we find no evidence for 
such effects on family members. We verify that family members’ statin consumption 
responses are preventive health investments by showing there is no increase in the 
incidence of own cardiovascular shocks (or of hospital contacts of any type) among 
spouses or children following the ­nonfatal cardiovascular shocks that we analyze. 
See online Appendix Table 7 for details on these analyses. We note, however, that 
all the shocks we study can certainly have various health effects, e.g., on the mental 
health of family members due to stress induced by the adverse family health event.
We additionally study two distant circles of family members and peers. The 
first is the sample of sons- and daughters-­in-law (to whom we collectively refer 
as “children-­in-law”). The second is the sample of coworkers based on matched 
­employer-employee register data, where we define workplaces using physical estab-
lishment units. To approximate peers with whom individuals are more likely to 
10 Cardiovascular shocks are among the leading causes of morbidity and mortality in the developed world 
(WHO 2014). They account for 1 in every 3 deaths among adults in the United States (with similar rates across 
the developed world), and every year more than 1.5 million Americans experience either a heart attack or a stroke. 
Statins are among the most widely prescribed and ­best-selling medications, with the global market for statins esti-
mated to be $20 billion annually in the last decade (Redberg and Katz 2016).

3171
FADLON AND NIELSEN: FAMILY HEALTH BEHAVIORS
VOL. 109 NO. 9
interact, we focus on close coworkers in the following way.11 From our sample 
of individuals who experience a health shock, we identify those who, during the 
­pre-shock periods from ​t  =  − 4​ to ​t  =  − 1​, have worked in smaller workplaces 
where the number of employees was equal to or lower than the sample’s twenty-fifth 
percentile (of approximately 20). We then identify their coworkers who have been 
employed in a similar occupation class,12 and who are close to these individuals in 
terms of age (with an age gap of 5 years or less).13 We exclude from this sample any 
coworker who is also a family member.
In our secondary setting of death events the sample includes all families in which 
a member died between 1985 and 2011. For these events we study spouses and chil-
dren, whose respective samples are constructed in the same way as before. Online 
Appendix Table 1 summarizes the various analysis samples that we analyze and 
reports summary statistics.
III.  Spillovers in Health Behaviors
We now turn to our analysis of how health behaviors are shaped through family 
spillovers by studying ­intra-generational effects on spouses and ­inter-generational 
effects on adult children. To further investigate the breadth of spillovers, we also 
analyze whether and to what degree the effects cascade to peers. In the core part 
of our analysis, we study the effects of ­nonfatal heart attacks and strokes on family 
members’ consumption of preventive care that is specific to these cardiovascular 
conditions. In complementary analysis, we study the effects of general fatal events 
on family members’ behaviors by analyzing overall changes in consumption of 
health care that is indicative of health behaviors and awareness. We focus on report-
ing and assessing the estimated effects in relative terms compared to counterfactual 
or baseline levels, in order to account for the underlying prevalence of the health 
care utilization outcomes we analyze within each ­subpopulation.
A. Effects of Severe ­Nonfatal Health Shocks
Cardiovascular shocks are directly tied to a ­disease-specific ­risk-reducing med-
ication, statin, so we focus on its consumption as a main behavioral outcome. This 
class of medication is composed of prescription drugs taken to lower cholesterol that 
are pervasively used to prevent cardiovascular disease. We therefore proceed with 
analyzing how individuals’ cardiovascular shocks affect the consumption of statins 
by members of their network.
­Intra-Generational Effects on Spouses.—We begin with studying spouses to 
identify family spillovers that cannot be attributed to biological channels. To visu-
alize the estimation strategy, we provide figures that plot the raw data for the main 
11 This is in the spirit of definitions used in De Giorgi, Frederiksen, and Pistaferri (forthcoming).
12 For occupation classes we follow the official classification method of Statistics Denmark that is constructed 
based on the International Standard Classification of Occupations (ISCO). This method classifies employees into 
managers and ­non-managers and, among ­non-managers, it further classifies employees into occupations by their 
required skill level (low/medium/high).
13 Estimations that perturb the thresholds of workplace size and age gap are provided in online Appendix Table 5.

3172
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
SEPTEMBER 2019
circles of spouses and children where ties are strongest and samples are largest, and 
we then turn to regression estimations for the remainder of the analysis. Panel A of 
Figure 1 plots the average responses in statin consumption by ­prime-age spouses of 
ages ­25–55. The structure of this and subsequent figures is as follows. The ­x-axis 
denotes time with respect to the shock, normalized to period 0. For the treatment 
group, period 0 is when the actual shock occurs; for the control group, period 0 is 
when a “placebo” shock occurs (while their actual shock occurs in period 5). The 
dashed gray line plots the behavior of the control group. To ease the comparison of 
trends, from which the treatment effect is identified, we normalize the level of the 
control group’s outcome to the ­pre-shock level of the treatment group’s outcome (in 
period ​t  =  − 1​). This normalized counterfactual is displayed by the blue line and 
squares. The red line and circles plot the behavior of the treatment group.
Panel A of Figure 1 first provides a visual verification of parallel trends across 
the treatment and control groups prior to period 0, as required by the design. Then, 
analyzing the effect of the shock, the figure reveals that ­prime-age individuals 
immediately increase their consumption of statins in response to their spouse’s car-
diovascular shock, and that this increased ­take-up persists for at least four years after 
the shock. Note that, once taken, this medication should be consumed indefinitely 
for the purpose of reducing the risk of experiencing a heart attack or stroke, so the 
displayed degree of adherence is a key element of the response pattern. Column 1 
of Table 1 estimates the corresponding regression using equation (1) and shows that 
the treatment effect grows over time, so that by the fourth year after the shock the 
increase in spouses’ statin consumption amounts to about 15 percent, an increase of 
1.17 percentage points (pp) on a base of 7.86 pp.
Panel A. Statin consumption by prime-age spouses
Panel B. Cholesterol blood tests
0
0.025
0.05
0.075
0.1
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
Time to shock
Consumption of statins
Cholesterol blood test
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0
1
2
3
4
Time to shock
Treatment
Control
Counterfactual
−4
−3
−2
−1
Figure 1. Effects of Cardiovascular Shocks on Spousal Consumption of Preventive Care
Notes: These figures display changes in spouses’ consumption of preventive care in response to family cardiovas-
cular shocks by plotting means of the raw data. The x-axis denotes time with respect to the shock, normalized to 
period 0. For the treatment group, period 0 is when the actual shock occurs; for the control group, period 0 is when 
a “placebo” shock occurs (while their actual shock occurs in period 5). The dashed gray line plots the behavior of 
the control group (along with the corresponding 95 percent confidence intervals). To ease the comparison of trends, 
from which the treatment effect is identified, we normalize the level of the control group’s outcome to the pre-shock 
level of the treatment group’s outcome (in period t = −1). This normalized counterfactual is displayed by the blue 
line and squares. The red line and circles plot the behavior of the treatment group (along with the corresponding 
95 percent confidence intervals).

3173
FADLON AND NIELSEN: FAMILY HEALTH BEHAVIORS
VOL. 109 NO. 9
Older spouses have much more frequent interactions with the medical system 
(see online Appendix Figure 1), which include routine checkups that are more com-
mon as individuals age. As the main risk factors for cardiovascular disease (beyond 
age and gender) are commonly screened for by individuals’ ­primary care providers 
(including hypertension, cholesterol levels, and diabetes) older spouses are presum-
ably more informed of their personal risk. Still, even for spouses between the ages 
of 55 and 85 we find that ­similar-magnitude spillovers are present, albeit on a larger 
baseline as statin consumption rates are higher for this group due to their older age; 
see column 2 of Table 1 (and online Appendix Figure 2).
For a subset of our sample, specifically those who reside in Greater Copenhagen, 
the data also include indicators for blood tests of cholesterol levels. As these tests are 
Table 1—Dynamic Family Effects of Cardiovascular Shocks
Spouses’ statin consumption
Spouses’ 
cholesterol testing
Adult children’s statin 
consumption
Prime age
Older
Younger
Older
(Ages 25–55)
(Ages 55–85)
(Ages 25–40)
(Ages 40–65)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Time to shock:
−4
0.00052
−0.00072
−0.00138
0.00012
−0.00000
(0.00104)
(0.00158)
(0.00441)
(0.00024)
(0.00065)
−3
0.00026
−0.00063
−0.00114
0.00008
−0.00014
(0.00096)
(0.00141)
(0.00456)
(0.00023)
(0.00060)
−2
0.00102
−0.00072
−0.00056
0.00015
0.00071
(0.00079)
(0.00113)
(0.00447)
(0.00020)
(0.00049)
−1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.00386
0.00234
0.03033
0.00067
  0.00150
(0.00095)
(0.00128)
(0.00498)
(0.00023)
(0.00061)
1
0.00511
0.00930
0.02052
0.00173
0.00429
(0.00134)
(0.00179)
(0.00516)
(0.00033)
(0.00089)
2
0.00702
0.01093
0.01100
0.00245
0.00433
(0.00169)
(0.00219)
(0.00545)
(0.00043)
(0.00113)
3
0.01012
0.01036
0.01572
0.00279
0.00765
(0.00203)
(0.00255)
(0.00570)
(0.00053)
(0.00135)
4
0.01166
0.01230
0.01720
0.00433
0.00799
(0.00234)
(0.00284)
(0.00624)
(0.00063)
(0.00159)
Treat
−0.00120
−0.00115
−0.00043
−0.00030
0.00005
(0.00119)
(0.00187)
(0.00393)
(0.00025)
(0.00075)
Counterfactual at t = 4
0.07863
0.22842
0.01180
0.04933
Percent change
14.83
5.38
36.69
16.20
Counterfactual at t = 0
0.12998
Percent change
23.33
Observations
441,720
667,980
214,793
1,179,387
647,667
Number of clusters
44,302
65,661
20,997
67,460
40,690
Notes: This table reports dynamic difference-in-differences estimates for the evolution of household responses to 
cardiovascular shocks using specification (1). It displays estimates for the δr parameter vector of the interaction 
between the treatment indicator and the indicators for time with respect to the shock from −4 to +4, where the 
baseline period is −1. We also report the estimate for the coefficient β on the variable treati. Counterfactual levels, 
calculated using specification (1), are reported for assessing response magnitudes relative to underlying levels. We 
include as controls age fixed effects, calendar year fixed effects, gender, and education, and we report in parenthe-
ses robust standard errors clustered at the household level.

3174
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
SEPTEMBER 2019
used to determine cardiovascular risk and precede statin consumption, their patterns 
can shed additional light on the dynamics of spousal responses. Panel B of Figure 1 
and column 3 of Table 1 report the effects of cardiovascular shocks on spousal cho-
lesterol testing. Promptly at the year of the shock, spouses respond with a large 
increase in their rate of cholesterol testing which amounts to about 23 percent. This 
response is consistent with the corresponding increase in their statin ­take-up within 
the immediate years following the shock. Compared to the counterfactual, choles-
terol testing remains higher also in the following years. This is in line with contin-
uous monitoring tests that are common in medication maintenance for those who 
have started consuming statins, and also mirrors the growing ­post-shock share of 
spouses who take up statins, as manifested by the gradual growth in the estimated 
statin consumption effect.
­Inter-Generational Effects on Adult Children.—We next turn to analyze house-
holds in which adult children are present at the time of the shock, to study how 
parental shocks spill over to health behaviors in the next generation. Specifically, 
we analyze adult children’s statin consumption responses to parental heart attacks 
or strokes at different stages of the life cycle. Panel A of Figure 2 plots the average 
response in statin consumption by the younger adult children in our sample, who 
were between ages 25 and 40 at the time of their parent’s health shock. As before, 
the figure provides a visual verification of parallel ­pre-trends across our treatment 
and control groups, in validation of the estimation strategy. Studying the effect of 
the shock, the plot reveals an immediate response by children which grows stronger 
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
Time to shock
Panel A. Statin consumption by younger
adult children (ages 25–40)
Panel B. Statin consumption by
older children (ages 40–65)
0
0.015
0.03
0.045
0.06
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
Time to shock
Consumption of statins
Consumption of statins
Treatment
Control
Counterfactual
Figure 2. Effects of Cardiovascular Shocks on Adult Children’s Consumption of Preventive Care
Notes: These figures display changes in adult children’s consumption of preventive care in response to family car-
diovascular shocks by plotting means of the raw data. The x-axis denotes time with respect to the shock, normal-
ized to period 0. For the treatment group, period 0 is when the actual shock occurs; for the control group, period 0 is 
when a “placebo” shock occurs (while their actual shock occurs in period 5). The dashed gray line plots the behav-
ior of the control group (along with the corresponding 95 percent confidence intervals). To ease the comparison of 
trends, from which the treatment effect is identified, we normalize the level of the control group’s outcome to the 
pre-shock level of the treatment group’s outcome (in period t = −1). This normalized counterfactual is displayed 
by the blue line and squares. The red line and circles plot the behavior of the treatment group (along with the cor-
responding 95 percent confidence intervals).

3175
FADLON AND NIELSEN: FAMILY HEALTH BEHAVIORS
VOL. 109 NO. 9
over time. Estimating equation (1), column 4 of Table 1 shows that by the fourth 
year after their parent experiences a heart attack or stroke, adult children increase 
their ­take-up of statins by 37 percent. Analogously, panel B of Figure 2 plots the 
spillovers to the older children in our sample, who were between ages 40 and 65 at 
the time of the parental shock. This group reveals a similar pattern of an immediate 
increase in statin consumption that amounts to 16 percent by the fourth year after 
the shock (see column 5 of Table 1).
Effects on Peers.—To study how far the spillovers of health shocks to improved 
health behaviors can reach, we analyze the effects on coworkers. We approximate 
peers with whom individuals are more likely to interact and focus the analysis on 
close coworkers (as defined in Section IIB). Column 1 of Table 2 displays the aver-
age treatment effect of health shocks on close coworkers’ consumption of preven-
tive care. The results indicate an increase of 1.35 pp, which amounts to an effect of 
16 percent. As this effect is economically considerable, it is also meaningful to esti-
mate the dynamic regression despite the small sample. Column 1 of online Appendix 
Table 10 indicates that with no differential trends in the ­pre-period, coworkers’ 
­take-up of statins exhibits a prompt increase in the years following a peer’s cardio-
vascular shock, which persists for the full analysis period. This evidence highlights 
a meaningful spillover that is transmitted through ties which are purely social, and 
is on the same order of magnitude as the estimated spillovers to ­prime-age spouses.
B. Effects of Fatal Health Events
Lastly, we investigate family spillovers in health behaviors in the extreme con-
text of death. We focus on spouses to identify spillovers that cannot be attributed to 
biological channels. Additionally, spouses in our sample are older and hence have 
higher baseline levels of health care utilization compared to children, which allows 
clear estimation of spillover dynamics for any given level of relative response. Still, 
Table 2—Effects of Cardiovascular Shocks on Statin Consumption by Coworkers
Distant coworkers
Close coworkers
Larger workplaces
Large age gap
Different occupation
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Treat × post
0.01349
0.00143
0.00297
0.00350
(0.00559)
(0.00330)
(0.00335)
(0.00524)
Counterfactual
0.08442
0.08249
0.06040
0.08871
Percent change
15.98
Observations
49,336
131,488
87,704
53,312
Number of clusters
3,498
4,057
4,744
4,071
Notes: This table reports difference-in-differences estimates for coworkers’ statin consumption responses to car-
diovascular shocks using specification (2). Counterfactual levels in the periods following the shock are calculated 
using this estimation. Close coworkers are defined as coworkers within the same occupation class and age range 
(with an age gap of 5 years or less) in smaller workplaces (in which the number of employees was equal to or lower 
than the sample’s 25th percentile). Distant coworkers are defined as workers within the same workplace who are 
more “distant” along at least one of these dimensions (as indicated at the top of columns 2–4). We include as con-
trols age fixed effects, calendar year fixed effects, gender, and education, and we report in parentheses robust stan-
dard errors clustered at the workplace level.  

3176
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
SEPTEMBER 2019
we replicate the main findings for the average spillover impact on the next genera-
tion of adult children (in online Appendix Table 6).
Increased Awareness of Health.—We begin by analyzing the effects of death 
events on family members’ general awareness of health, using two proxies for the 
degree to which individuals may pay attention to health issues. The first outcome 
that we study is an indicator for whether spouses are hospitalized for visits that end 
up being classified as encounters for medical observation of suspected conditions 
that are ruled out ­ex post. These hospital contacts can be indicative of greater vig-
ilance to symptoms that are retrospectively realized as “false alarms.” For visual 
clarity of the dynamic patterns that we find in this subsection, we report our findings 
by plotting the ​δ​r​ coefficients from specification (1) along with their ­95 percent con-
fidence inter