NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE EFFECTS OF EXTENDED UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE OVER THE BUSINESS CYCLE:
EVIDENCE FROM REGRESSION DISCONTINUITY ESTIMATES OVER TWENTY YEARS
Johannes F. Schmieder
Till M. von Wachter
Stefan Bender
Working Paper 17813
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17813
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2012
We would like to thank Melanie Arntz, Robert Barro, David Card, Raj Chetty, Pierre-André Chiappori,
Janet Currie, Steve Davis, Christian Dustmann, Johannes Görgen, Jennifer Hunt, Larry Katz, Kevin
Lang, David Lee, Leigh Linden, Bentley MacLeod, Costas Meghir, Matt Notowidigdo, Jonah Rockoff,
Gary Solon, Gerard van den Berg, four anonymous referees, as well as seminar participants at Boston
University, Columbia University, University of California Berkeley, Chicago Booth GSB, University
of Bayreuth, University of Nuremberg, University of Mannheim,University of Munich, University
of Wisconsin Maddison, Harvard University, Brown University, the NBER Summer Institute 2010,
conferences at the Philadelphia and Atlanta Federal Reserve, the European Central Bank, the RWI
Essen, and the Econometric Society World Congress 2010, for helpful comments. Adrian Baron, Benedikt
Hartmann, Uliana Loginova, Patrycja Scioch, and Stefan Seth provided sterling research assistance.
All remaining errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Johannes F. Schmieder, Till M. von Wachter, and Stefan Bender. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Effects of Extended Unemployment Insurance over the Business Cycle: Evidence from
Regression Discontinuity Estimates Over Twenty Years
Johannes F. Schmieder, Till M. von Wachter, and Stefan Bender
NBER Working Paper No. 17813
February 2012
JEL No. J64,J65
ABSTRACT
One goal of extending the duration of unemployment insurance (UI) in recessions is to increase UI
coverage in the face of longer unemployment spells. Although it is a common concern that such extensions
may themselves raise nonemployment durations, it is not known how recessions would affect the magnitude
of this moral hazard. To obtain causal estimates of the differential effects of UI in booms and recessions,
this paper exploits the fact that, in Germany, potential UI benefit duration is a function of exact age
which is itself invariant over the business cycle. We implement a regression discontinuity design separately
for twenty years and correlate our estimates with measures of the business cycle. We find that the
nonemployment effects of a month of additional UI benefits are, at best, somewhat declining in recessions.
Yet, the UI exhaustion rate, and therefore the additional coverage provided by UI extensions, rises
substantially during a downturn. The ratio of these two effects represents the nonemployment response
of workers weighted by the probability of being affected by UI extensions. Hence, our results imply
that the effective moral hazard effect of UI extensions is significantly lower in recessions than in booms.
Using a model of job search with liquidity constraints, we also find that, in the absence of market-wide
effects, the net social benefits from UI extensions can be expressed either directly in terms of the exhaustion
rate and the nonemployment effect of UI durations, or as a declining function of our measure of effective
moral hazard.
Johannes F. Schmieder
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
johannes.schmieder@gmail.com
Till M. von Wachter
Department of Economics
Columbia University
601 West 115th Str. Apt. 101
New York, NY 10025
and NBER
vw2112@columbia.edu
Stefan Bender
Institute for Employment Research (IAB)
Regensburger Str. 104
90478 Nuremberg
Germany
stefan.bender@iab.de
An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w17813

I
INTRODUCTION
Providing unemployment insurance (UI) beneﬁts is one of the most common policy tools to ease
the hardship of job losers in recessions. Despite the widespread existence of UI systems, there is
remarkable heterogeneity across countries in how these systems react to the business cycle. While
in most countries, including Germany, potential UI beneﬁt durations are constant over the business
cycle, in others, particularly the United States, potential UI durations are regularly extended dur-
ing recessions. Whether or not such countercyclical potential UI durations are socially beneﬁcial
is highly debated among economists (e.g. Needels and Nicholson 2004). One justiﬁcation for in-
creases in UI durations is that, absent the extensions, a large fraction of recipients would exhaust
beneﬁts and experience signiﬁcant declines in consumption (Gruber 1997, Browning and Crossley
2001, Congressional Budget Ofﬁce 2004). However, a long literature suggests that extensions in
UI durations entail a cost in terms of a reduction in individuals’ labor supply (Solon 1979, Mofﬁtt
1985, Katz and Meyer 1990, Meyer 1990, Hunt 1995). As of now, there is no clear consensus how
this disincentive effect changes during recessions. Some observers have argued that it is larger
during a downturn (Ljungqvist and Sargent 1998, 2008) while others have suggested that it may
instead be smaller (Krueger and Meyer 2002).1
Identifying the changing effect of UI extensions over the business cycle is difﬁcult in a setting
where UI extensions are endogenous to the state of the labor market.2 To circumvent this problem,
in this paper we provide new estimates of the variation of the effect of UI durations on nonemploy-
ment and beneﬁt durations over the business cycle using a regression discontinuity (RD) design
1The intuition for the view of stronger disincentive effects is that the incidence and cost of job loss is particularly
severe in a recession (von Wachter, Song, and Manchester 2009). In this case the effective replacement rate may rise
beyond the typical replacement rate and imply stronger and possibly lasting effects on unemployment as in Ljungqvist
and Sargent (1998, 2008). On the other hand, higher costs of job search may reduce the effect of UI parameters on
labor supply and on the aggregate unemployment rate in recessions.
2In the United States, the trigger-based state-level extended beneﬁts (EB) can be used together with the timing of
discretionary federal temporary emergency unemployment compensation (EUC) to identify the effect of unemploy-
ment insurance duration on nonemployment. Rothstein (2011) exploits this stragegy to evaluate the effect of EB and
EUC during the 2008 recession, and ﬁnds signiﬁcantly negative but moderate effects. Card and Levine (2000) exam-
ine the effects of an extension in UI unrelated to local unemployment conditions in New Jersey, and also ﬁnd more
moderate effects on employment than previous studies based on EB and EUC in the 1970s and 1980s.
1

and data from Germany. Our strategy exploits the fact that the German UI system implies large
differences in the potential duration of UI beneﬁts by exact age of the UI claimant. This policy is
invariant to the business cycle and hence allows us to circumvent the endogeneity problem. Using
day-to-day administrative data on the universe of unemployment spells and ensuing employment
outcomes for mature workers in Germany from the mid-1980s to 2008, we implement the RD
approach by year and by industry, and correlate our estimates with indicators of the business cycle.
To help clarify the potential implications of our results for the welfare effect of UI extensions
over the business cycle, we use a search model with endogenous search intensity and liquidity
constraints (e.g., Card, Chetty, and Weber 2007a, Chetty 2008). From this model, we derive a
formula that directly relates the welfare gains of UI extensions over the business cycle to increases
in the UI exhaustion rate, and the welfare costs to the effect of potential UI durations on nonem-
ployment and program duration. As in the related literature (e.g., Kiley 2003, Sanchez 2008), our
formula implies that optimal potential UI durations vary inversely with a summary measure of the
disincentive effect of UI extensions: the ratio of the effects of UI extensions on nonemployment
duration and UI beneﬁt duration. This measure implicitly controls for changes in the number of
individuals ’at risk’ of exhausting beneﬁts who are most affected by UI extensions, and is thus
ideal for comparing changes in the disincentive effects over the business cycle.
We begin by using our RD strategy to obtain labor supply effects with respect to potential UI
durations for large differential expansions for mature workers with stable labor force attachment.
Our estimates imply a moderate rise in nonemployment of about 0.1 months for each additional
month of potential UI beneﬁt duration. This is robust across a number of alternative speciﬁca-
tions. Furthermore, these effects on labor supply are similar for different increases in UI duration,
similar across demographic groups, similar for workers with weaker labor force attachment, and
somewhat larger for workers unlikely to take up extended unemployment assistance after exhaust-
ing UI beneﬁts.
Our analysis of variation over the business cycle points to moderate, and for the most part
statistically insigniﬁcant declines in the effects of a one-month increase in potential UI durations
2

on nonemployment durations in large recessions. On the other hand, we ﬁnd that the effect of
UI extensions on beneﬁt durations, and thus the additional coverage provided by UI, increases
signiﬁcantly in recessions, mainly due to a rise in the UI exhaustion rate. The ratio of the two
estimates – which is our summary measure of the disincentive effect of UI beneﬁts that implicitly
controls for changes in the probability of being affected by the extensions over the business cycle –
is clearly countercyclical. The ratio indicates that, for each additional month in actual UI durations,
the response of labor supply to UI extensions falls signiﬁcantly in recessions. These results are
robust to considering variation by year or year-by-industry, the use of alternative measures of the
business cycle, holding characteristics of UI claimants constant, including workers with weaker
labor-force attachment, and an extensive robustness analysis.
By using regression discontinuity estimates in different economic regimes to assess whether
the duration of UI has stronger or weaker employment effects in booms and recessions and by
explicitly analyzing the effects on beneﬁt durations and exhaustion rates, the paper complements
an earlier literature on cyclical effects of UI durations (Mofﬁtt 1985, Jurajda and Tannery 2003)
and related recent work on UI beneﬁt levels using state-level differences in unemployment and UI
parameters in the United States (Kroft and Notowidigdo 2010). Our estimates also add to existing
studies of the labor supply effects of UI durations by combining large increases in UI durations
and a large number of years and observations with a sharp regression discontinuity design (Meyer
1990, Katz and Meyer 1990, Hunt 1995, Lalive 2008, Rothstein 2011). In contrast to studies using
region or time variation in UI durations, our RD design allows us to identify changes in the actual
behavioral response, while holding constant any market-level factors that may change over time or
across regions.
The paper is also related to the literature concerned with the welfare implications of parameters
of the current unemployment insurance system. By deriving the welfare effects of extensions in
the duration of UI beneﬁts, we extend the existing literature focused on UI beneﬁt levels (Baily
1978, Kiley 2003, Shimer and Werning 2007, Chetty 2008, Sanchez 2008, Kroft and Notowidigdo
2010). Our formula therefore also clariﬁes existing ’rules of thumb’ regarding the optimal exten-
3

sion of UI beneﬁts. According to our formula, the duration of UI should neither only be extended
until the exhaustion rate is constant (Corson and Nicholson 1982), nor only extended to hold the
nonemployment effect of UI constant (Mofﬁtt 1985). Rather, setting optimal potential UI du-
rations should take into account both factors and set durations according to the effective moral
hazard parameter we propose. Since the welfare formula depends on the actual nonemployment
and beneﬁt response to UI durations inﬂuenced by market-level factors which our estimates hold
constant (Landais, Michaillat, and Saez 2010), we do not derive direct welfare implications from
our results.
The outline of the paper is as follows. In Section II, we derive the welfare effect of extensions
in UI beneﬁts. Section III describes the institutional environment in Germany, the administrative
data, and our empirical approach. Sections IV and V contain our main ﬁndings regarding the effect
of extended UI on labor supply and beneﬁt duration over the business cycle. Section VI concludes,
relating our empirical ﬁndings to a theoretical welfare formula, and providing suggestions for
future research.
II
THE COSTS AND BENEFITS OF UI EXTENSIONS IN A SEARCH MODEL
In this section, we use a model of job search with endogenous search intensity and liquidity con-
straints (Card, Chetty, and Weber 2007a; Chetty 2008) to show that the welfare costs of UI beneﬁt
extensions rise with the adverse labor supply effect of UI durations, while the welfare beneﬁts rise
with the exhaustion rate of UI beneﬁts. We then show that, as in the literature on optimal beneﬁt
levels, the welfare effect of UI extensions can be written as a function of a single parameter cap-
turing individuals’ labor supply responses to UI extensions. Here, we only state the main results of
the model and their intuition, relegating derivations and further discussions to the Web Appendix.
Worker’s Problem. The model describes optimal behavior of a worker living T discrete periods
(e.g., months) who is unemployed and receiving UI beneﬁts in period t = 0. In each period, the
worker decides how intensely to search for a job. Let st denote search intensity, which is normal-
ized to the probability of ﬁnding a job. Employment is an absorbing state and, when employed,
4

a worker receives a wage of wt and pays a tax of τ, which is used exclusively to ﬁnance unem-
ployment insurance beneﬁts. Furthermore, in each period the worker owns assets At, the level of
which is constrained by a lower bound. As in Chetty (2008), in our baseline case we assume that
the wage a worker can receive is ﬁxed (such that there is no role for reservation wages), the initial
asset level A0 is ﬁxed, and there is no heterogeneity. Relaxing these assumptions does not affect
our main conclusions (see the Web Appendix).
While unemployed, the worker receives a ﬁxed level of UI beneﬁts b < wt for, at most, a ﬁxed
number of P periods. During this period, the worker’s ﬂow utility function of consumption is
denoted by u(cu
t ), which can differ from the utility function of consumption during employment,
v(ce
t ). After exhausting UI beneﬁts, the worker receives a ﬁxed baseline utility and no further
transfer payments (though this assumption is easily relaxed). The total duration of nonemployment
is D ≡∑T−1
t=0 St, where St ≡∏t
j=0(1−sj) is the survivor function at time t. Total lifetime of workers
at the time of entering unemployment is thus broken up into three periods: a period of receiving
UI beneﬁts (B ≡∑P−1
t=0 St), a period of nonemployment without receiving UI beneﬁts (D−B), and
a period of employment (T −D).
Welfare Effect of UI Extensions. Assuming the social planner sets taxes to achieve a balanced
budget of the UI system and that workers respond optimally to incentives, we can derive the effects
of changes in the potential duration of UI beneﬁts P on welfare.3 Social welfare at time t = 0 is
given as W0, the expected lifetime utility of an unemployed worker.4 The budget constraint of
the social planner requires τ =
B
T−D b. After some algebra, we obtain our ﬁrst main result. The
marginal welfare gain of increasing P is
3The solution of the worker’s decision problem follows standard principles of dynamic optimization. We follow
the existing applied literature on the optimality of the UI system by focusing on a constraint optimization within the
class of typical UI systems (e.g., Baily 1978, Chetty 2008). A large theoretical literature has derived the full optimal
time-path of UI beneﬁts (e.g., Hopenhayn and Nicolini 1997, Shimer and Werning 2007, Pavoni 2007).
4Focusing on the welfare of a worker who just lost his job loses no generality. Alternatively, one can assume that,
at t=0, only a fraction of individuals are unemployed. In this case, social welfare, W0, represents the expected average
utility of the employed and the unemployed. While this makes the exposition more notationally heavy, it does not
affect the welfare results (see Web Appendix for more details). To analyze marginal changes in P, we need to assume
that P can be increased by a fraction of 1 (a month in our case), and that, if P is not an integer number, it means a
fraction of the period int(P) is covered by the higher beneﬁt level b.
5

dW0
dP = dB
dP

1
b

u′(cu
P)−E0,T−1v′(ce
t )

−
 dB
dP

2
b+ dD
dP τ

E0,T−1v′(ce
t )
(1)
where dB
dP

1 ≡SP is the exhaustion rate of UI beneﬁts, and dB
dP

2 ≡∑P−1
t=0
dSt
dP is the increase in beneﬁt
duration due to reduced search intensity among unemployed individuals before the exhaustion
point. dD
dP is the increase in the total nonemployment duration in response to a rise in potential UI
duration. The total effect of potential on actual beneﬁt duration is dB
dP ≡dB
dP

1 + dB
dP

2.
The ﬁrst term in this expression states that the marginal welfare beneﬁt (per person) of ex-
tending UI beneﬁts is the transfer, ﬁnanced by taxes, of consumption from the employed to the
unemployed at the exhaustion point times the probability of exhaustion
  dB
dP

1

. This term is pos-
itive as long as the marginal utility of consumption of the unemployed in period P, u′(cu
P), is
higher than the expected marginal utility of consumption of the employed, E0,T−1v′(ce
t ). If the two
marginal utilities are equal, then there is no rationale for unemployment insurance. In the model
here, this would be the case if the individual is not liquidity constrained.
The second term captures the costs of extending UI beneﬁts due to the behavioral change
induced by the more generous UI system. This cost is the per capita increase in taxes levied upon
employed individuals multiplied by their marginal utility. Taxes rise because the unemployed
lower their search intensity and this thus increases their receipt of UI beneﬁts
  dB
dP

2 ×b

. They
also increase because longer nonemployment durations reduce the number of periods in which
individuals are employed and pay taxes
 dD
dP

.
Empirical Implementation. Potential UI durations are at an optimum if dW0
dP = 0. While solving
the model laid out here for the optimal UI durations would require estimating a full structural
model - beyond the scope of this paper - equation (1) provides a framework to analyze under what
circumstances the welfare beneﬁts of UI extensions are likely to vary over the business cycle. For
any given change in UI duration P, the welfare effect potentially varies over the business cycle
with different components of the formula.
The beneﬁt levels b are, apart from changes in the sample composition(which we control for),
unchanged over the business cycle. As long as the government smooths taxes over the business
6

cycle, which is approximately the case in most countries, the welfare cost of decreasing the tax base
by one worker-month (
B
T−Db multiplied by the average marginal utility of the employed individual
who is taxed, E0,T−1v′(ce
t )), can be considered ﬁxed from a welfare perspective.5 The components
that potentially vary over the business cycle are the increase in nonemployment durations (dD
dP), the
increase in beneﬁt durations ( dB
dP

1 and dB
dP

2) and the marginal utility of an unemployed individual
at the exhaustion point (u′(cu
P)). As further discussed in Section IV.B, changes in the latter can
arise if liquidity – and hence the ability to self-insure – varies over the cycle.
The model remains agnostic as to the potential sources of cyclical variation in dD
dP, dB
dP

1, and
dB
dP

2. One source of variation is changes in individual incentives affecting search intensity (the
partial-equilibrium or micro effect of UI extensions). In the working paper version of this paper,
we showed that an increase in search costs in recessions, due, for example, to a decline in job-offer
arrival rates, reduces dD
dP. On the other hand, a decline in reemployment wages, possibly due to real-
location in recessions, would tend to increase dD
dP. The effective exit rate from nonemployment, and
hence nonemployment duration, will also be affected by cyclical variation in market-wide factors,
such as congestion effects, vacancy rates, or the take-up of UI beneﬁts (the general-equilibrium or
macro effect). In our empirical application, we will control for market-level variation, and hence
will identify variation in nonemployment duration due mainly to differences in incentives. In Sec-
tion IV and the Conclusion, we discuss under what circumstances this is sufﬁcient to sign the
change in the welfare effect of UI extensions over the business cycle.
Approximate Formula. Since our data allows us to obtain estimates of the effect of UI exten-
sions on the full survivor function, in our empirical analysis we will measure the three relevant
marginal effects separately. However, we ﬁnd that the cyclical variation of the exhaustion rate,
5To be more precise, the marginal utility of employed individuals who are affected by a marginal increase in taxes
can be considered constant as long as the government chooses an optimal tax policy that levies additional taxes in
periods when the costs of taxation are lowest, rather than balancing the budget every period (e.g., Andersen and Svarer
2010). In practice, there appears to be considerable smoothing of UI taxes over the business cycle. For example, in
Germany, payroll taxes used to ﬁnance UI beneﬁts do not vary with the business cycle. Similarly, in the United States,
the states’ UI trust funds run deﬁcits in recessions. Such smoothing, rather than levying high taxes in recessions when
UI expenditures are high, would be optimal as long as the marginal utility of the employed is approximately constant
over the cycle. Compared to large earning losses in recessions for job losers, the ﬂuctuations in earning trajectories,
and hence expected marginal utility, of the average employed taxpayer are typically weak (von Wachter, Song, and
Manchester 2009).
7

dB
dP

1, is the main contributor to the variation in dB
dP over time. On the other hand, dB
dP

2is driven by
the shift in the survivor function before the exhaustion point and thus has nearly the same cyclical
variation as dD
dP, while at the same time having very little impact on the variation in dB
dP . Thus, in the
discussion of our main results, we will focus on the properties of dB
dP and dD
dP. In fact, for the case of
a constant hazard of leaving nonemployment (i.e., st = s), one can show that dB
dP

2 is proportional
to the nonemployment effect: dB
dP

2 = dD
dPξ, where ξ ≡
 1−Ps(1−s)P−1 −(1−s)P
is a constant.
Furthermore, in this case, the welfare effect of extensions in potential UI durations indeed depends
only on the two parameters dB
dP and dD
dP and one can thus derive the alternative formula
dW0
dP = dB
dP b

u′(cu
P)−E0,T−1v′(ce
t )

−dD
dP bΩ
(2)
where Ω≡ξu′(cu
P)+
B
T−DE0,T−1v′(ce
t ) > 0. This formula indexes the welfare gain by the effect of
potential beneﬁt duration on actual beneﬁt duration
 dB
dP

, and the welfare cost by the disincentive
effect of UI extensions on labor supply
 dD
dP

. Again, the main source of variation over the business
cycle in this formula should be the employment and beneﬁt effects of UI extensions. Even though
the hazard in our sample is declining somewhat over the nonemployment spell, in simulations we
found that the alternative welfare formula in equation (2) approximates the exact welfare formula
in equation (1) quite well. The approximation is likely to work even better in settings such as the
United States, where the hazard has been shown to be close to constant (Katz and Meyer 1990).
Rescaled Formula. To determine whether optimal UI duration should change in a recession,
the approach so far requires separately measuring the effect of UI extensions on nonemployment
and beneﬁt duration. To express the formula in terms of a single statistic capturing the role of
disincentive effects, we can rescale the formula by the effect of UI extensions on actual beneﬁt
duration multiplied by the beneﬁt level (dB
dP b). The term dB
dP b measures how many additional
dollars of UI beneﬁts are paid for an additional month of potential UI durations. Dividing dW0
dP by
dB
dP b thus yields the marginal welfare gain (in dollars) from spending one additional dollar on UI
expenditures. The approximate welfare formula becomes
8

dW ∗
dP ≡dW0
dP
dB
dP b

=

u′(cu
P)−E0,T−1v′(ce
t )

−dD
dB Ω,
(3)
where dD
dB =
dD
dP
dB
dP . This equation captures the welfare gain in dollars from an extension of UI ben-
eﬁts relative to the additional dollar amount of expenditures on UI. The key new parameter in
this equation is the ratio of the effect of UI extensions on nonemployment and actual beneﬁt du-
rations, which is the instrumental variable (IV) estimator of the effect of actual UI duration (B)
on nonemployment duration (D), using the maximum potential beneﬁt duration (P) as instrument.
This interpretation is appealing for several reasons. First, this estimator effectively rescales the
marginal effect of the UI extension on nonemployment duration by the effective take-up of UI
beneﬁts due to UI extensions, and hence by the population ’at risk’ of being affected by the beneﬁt
extension. This implies that if dD
dP is constant over the business cycle, but dB
dP is increasing in reces-
sions, the effective behavioral response to UI durations is declining.6 Second, our welfare formula
in equation (3) is similar in spirit to those in Baily (1974) and Chetty (2008), which contain the
elasticity of nonemployment with respect to beneﬁt levels as a single measure of the disincentive
effect. Our measure of the disincentive effect, dD
dB, and the nonemployment duration elasticity with
respect to beneﬁt levels or durations, provide alternative normalizations for the number of individ-
uals ’at risk’. From this point of view, our measure is well-suited for comparisons of the effect of
UI over time since it more directly normalizes for changes in UI beneﬁt take-up. Hence, in parallel
to the prior literature, ceteris paribus, a decline in the disincentive effect as measured by the IV es-
timator implies a rise in optimal beneﬁt duration. Finally, a key advantage for our purposes is that
we can obtain an estimate of dD
dB for broader samples of workers, for whom, for reasons discussed
in Section III, we cannot obtain the rescaled marginal effects dB
dP and dD
dP separately. Therefore, we
6The IV estimator can be interpreted as a local average treatment effect (LATE), which is the weighted sum of the
effects of an increase in actual UI duration on nonemployment duration at each duration up to the maximum duration
P, weighted by the fraction of people whose beneﬁt take-up is affected by the UI extension. The weighting function is
the difference in the survivor functions in the case with and without beneﬁt extension up to the new maximum beneﬁt
duration (Angrist and Imbens 1995). If individuals were myopic and only responded by altering search intensity at
beneﬁt exhaustion, we would have dB
dP = SP. In this case, the IV estimator measures the effect of the beneﬁt extensions
on nonemployment durations for those exhausting beneﬁts and we would rescale the welfare formula by the exhaustion
rate times the beneﬁt level.
9

will also report estimates of this ratio in our empirical analysis.
III
INSTITUTIONS, DATA AND METHODOLOGY
Several aspects of the German UI system make it ideal for studying the costs and beneﬁts of UI
extensions over the business cycle. Discontinuities in eligibility based on exact age allow us to
estimate the effect of extensions in UI durations using a regression discontinuity (RD) design.
A particular advantage is that the discontinuities lead to large extensions in the duration of UI
at multiple age thresholds that are stable over long stretches of time, and thus do not depend on
the business cycle. The system also provides the necessary detailed, longitudinal data on UI and
employment spells for large samples needed to credibly implement the RD design over multiple
years.
III.A
The Unemployment Insurance System in Germany
The German unemployment insurance system provides income replacement to eligible workers
who lose their job without fault. The replacement rate is ﬁxed, as is the duration of disbursement.
For an individual without children, the replacement rate is 63 percent of previous net earnings.7
From the 1980s onwards, the maximum duration of beneﬁts was tied to recipients’ exact age at
the beginning of the UI spell and their prior labor force history. It is this difference which we
exploit to estimate the effect of extensions in duration of UI beneﬁts on nonemployment durations.
Figure I shows the discontinuities in potential beneﬁt duration by age when claiming for the group
of workers who, given their employment histories, are entitled to the maximum durations in their
respective age group. Between July 1987 and March 1999, the potential UI duration for workers
who were younger than 42 was 12 months. For workers between 42 and 43, potential UI duration
7Workers become eligible to receive UI beneﬁts if they have worked for at least 12 months in the previous three
years. Workers who lose their jobs because of their own fault or quit are also eligible for UI beneﬁts after a waiting
period of 12 weeks which are subtracted from their potential UI durations. While exact data on the number of quits
among UI recipients are not available for our time period, our own calculations show a small spike of 3.5% of UI
take-up 85 days after the end of a job. UI sanctions for not taking suitable jobs exist but appear to be rarely enforced
(Wilke 2005). For individuals with children, the replacement rate is 68 percent. We provide more information on the
institutional details in the Web Appendix.
10

increased to 18 months; for workers from 44 to 48 (49 to 53), the maximum duration further rose to
22 (26) months. As further explained below, in our main analysis, we restrict ourselves to workers
in this age range who qualify for the maximum potential durations to obtain precise measures of
potential UI durations. At the end of the 1990s, a reform occurred which was meant to reduce
potential disincentive effects of unemployment insurance. As shown in Figure I, starting in April
1999, the potential UI durations were lowered and the age thresholds were shifted upwards by
three years. Thus, in order to be eligible for 18 months or 22 months of beneﬁts, a worker had to
be at least 45 or 47 on the claiming date. We will use these alternative thresholds to validate our
main research design.8
Individuals who exhaust regular UI beneﬁts and whose net liquid wealth falls below a thresh-
old are eligible for unemployment assistance (UA), which does not have a limited duration. The
nominal replacement rate is 53 percent, but UA payments are reduced substantially by spousal
earnings and other sources of income. For example, for a woman whose husband earns as much
as 10 percent more than her, the UA beneﬁts are zero. Given that about 80 percent of individuals
in our cohort and age range are married, UA beneﬁts are, on average, about 35 percent for men
and 10 percent for women. Among all new UI spells in our sample, about 10 to15 percent end up
taking UA beneﬁts. We study the potential effect of UA on our ﬁndings in our empirical analysis.
III.B
Social Security Data
The data for this paper is the universe of social security records in Germany. For each individual
working in Germany between 1975 and 2008, the data contains day-to-day longitudinal infor-
mation on every period of employment in a job covered by social security and every period of
receiving unemployment insurance beneﬁts, as well as corresponding wages and beneﬁt levels.
Compared to many other social security data sets, this data is very detailed. We observe several
8The reform was enacted in 1997 but phased in gradually, so that for people in the highest experience group, which
constitutes our analysis sample, it only took effect in April 1999 (See Arntz, Lo, and Wilke 2007). To avoid confusion,
we refer to this as the “1999-regime” in the text. In 2003 and 2004, the entire German social security system underwent
a comprehensive series of reforms (the Hartz reforms). We use the period between April 1999 and December 2004 as
a second sample period, thus excluding workers who became unemployed after the last Hartz reform took place.
11

demographic characteristics, namely gender, education, birth date, nationality, place of residence
and work, as well as detailed job characteristics, such as average daily wage, occupation, industry,
and employer characteristics.9
To study the effect of extensions in potential UI durations, we created our analysis sample by
selecting all nonemployment spells in this data in the age range of 40 to 49. Given changes in
the institutional framework discussed in the previous section, we consider unemployment spells
starting any time between July 1987 and December 2004. This yields over 9 million individual
periods of unemployment. (Column 2 of Table A-1). For each period of nonemployment , we
created variables about the previous work history (such as job tenure, experience, wage, industry
and previous occupation), the duration of receipt of UI beneﬁts in days, the level of UI beneﬁts,
and information about the next job held after nonemployment.
Since we do not directly observe whether individuals are unemployed, we follow the previ-
ous literature and use length of nonemployment as a measure for unemployment durations (Card,
Chetty, and Weber 2007b). The duration of nonemployment is measured as the time between the
start of receiving UI beneﬁts and the date of the next registered employment spell. Since some
people take many years before returning to registered employment while others never do so, we
cap nonemployment durations at 36 months and set the duration of all longer spells at this cap.
This has the advantage of reducing the inﬂuence of outliers and avoiding censoring due to the end
of the observation period in 2008. Our results are robust to the exact choice of the cap.
The main ’treatment’ variable we are interested in is the potential duration of unemployment
insurance beneﬁts for any given nonemployment spell. To calculate potential UI duration for each
observation in our sample, we use information about the law in the relevant time periods together
with information on exact dates of birth and work histories. This yields precise measures for
workers who have been employed for a long continuous time and are eligible for the maximum
potential durations for their age groups. However, the calculation is not as clear cut for workers
9Individual workers can be followed using a unique person identiﬁer. Since about 80 percent of all jobs are within
the social security system (the main exceptions are self-employed, students, and government employees) this results
in nearly complete work histories for a majority of individuals.
12

with intermittent unemployment spells because of complex carry-forward provisions in the law.
We thus deﬁne our core analysis sample to be all unemployment spells of workers who have been
working for at least 52 months of the last seven years and did not receive unemployment insurance
beneﬁts during that time period. This reduces our sample to about two million new UI spells
(Column 4 of Table A-1). Below, we show that our results are robust to broadening our sample to
include workers with weaker labor force attachment.
Statistics for various samples are shown in the Data Appendix to the paper. As expected,
relative to a general sample of nonemployment spells in Germany in the same age-range, the sam-
ple resulting from our restrictions on employment histories is more likely to be male, has higher
job tenure, and has higher earnings prior to nonemployment. As a result, wage losses upon re-
employment are larger and elapsed nonemployment spells are somewhat longer. Yet there is lit-
tle difference in educational attainment, nor are there strong differences in other post-UI career
outcomes. We conclude that while our main sample is not representative for the full sample of
nonemployment spells in Germany over this time period, it is likely to be typical of mature unem-
ployed workers who lost a job during a recession. In our Web Appendix (Table W-14), we also
show that the degree of job stability and other characteristics of our sample before unemployment
is comparable to UI recipients in the same age-range in the United States. Hence, our main sample
also bears similar features of UI populations of the same age-range studied in part of the prior
literature.
Elapsed duration in UI and nonemployment spells is large, but similar to what is found in
studies using comparable data. For example, in the Austrian case, the mean duration of nonem-
ployment or time between jobs for those reemployed by three years is similar (Card, Chetty, and
Weber 2007b). The average duration of spells is larger than what is typically found in the United
States. Yet, the differences are smaller where comparable data is available. This is found for
the duration of UI spells in Card and Levine (2000), or for nonemployment durations in the US
Displaced Worker Survey (DWS) we analyzed. In the DWS, among 40 to 49 year old displaced
workers who have received UI , about 15 percent are still not employed after three years, a ﬁgure
13

comparable to Germany, where the fraction of individuals whose spell is censored at 36 months is
23 percent.10
III.C
Methodology
The institutional structure and data allow us to estimate the causal effect of UI beneﬁt durations
on nonemployment duration and other outcomes using a regression discontinuity design. In a ﬁrst
step, we exploit the sharp age thresholds in eligibility rules for workers with previously high labor
force attachment in Germany to estimate the effect of large extensions in UI durations on labor
supply. We then replicate this approach for every year or year-by-industry in our sample, and
correlate it with indicators of the business cycle.
Throughout the paper, the analysis proceeds in two steps. We follow common practice and
show smoothed ﬁgures to visually examine discontinuities at the eligibility thresholds (Lee and
Lemieux 2010). To obtain estimates for the main causal effects, we follow standard regression
discontinuity methodology and estimate variants of the following regression model
yia = β0 +β1Da≥a∗+ f(a)+εia,
(4)
where yia is an outcome variable, such as nonemployment duration, of an individual i of age a.
Da≥a∗is a dummy variable that indicates that an individual is above the age threshold a∗. For
our pooled estimates we focus on the longest period for which the UI system was stable, July
1987 - March 1999, and we use the three sharp thresholds at age 42, 44 and 49.11 We estimate
equation (4) locally around the three cutoffs and specify f(a) as a linear function while allowing
different slopes on both sides of the cutoff. In our main results we use a bandwidth of two years on
each side of the cutoff, but conﬁrm the robustness of our ﬁnding to using even smaller bandwidths.
We then replicate this approach for different years, industries, demographic groups, and outcomes.
10For more information regarding data construction and the comparison with the US, see the Web Appendix.
11There is a fourth discontinuity during this period at age 54. Since, at this age, early retirement becomes common
and various policies to facilitate early retirement interact with the UI system, we focus on younger workers in this
paper.
14

All results are robust to an extensive sensitivity analysis summarized in Section V.
III.D
Identiﬁcation Assumptions
The identiﬁcation assumption of the RD design requires that all factors other than the treatment
variable vary continuously at the age threshold. If this holds, then estimates for β1 can be inter-
preted as the causal effect of an increase in potential UI durations on the outcome variable, since
the ﬂexible continuous function f(a) captures the inﬂuence of all other factors. In our setting, both
the employer who lays off workers as well as the individual have some inﬂuence on the timing
of job loss and the claiming of unemployment beneﬁts. Our data allow us to investigate in de-
tail whether this leads to sorting around the eligibility cutoffs. The overall conclusion from this
analysis is that our labor supply effects represent valid regression discontinuity estimates.
One approach for assessing the identiﬁcation assumption is to test for discontinuities in observ-
able characteristics at the threshold by estimating equation (4) with observable characteristics as
outcome variables. Table I presents results of these regressions using two-year bandwidths around
the cutoffs. Of the 21 coefﬁcients in Table I, there are only two statistically signiﬁcant at the ﬁve
percent level. There is a statistically signiﬁcant increase in the fraction female at the 42-year and
49-year thresholds, however the magnitudes are still quite small. Examination of corresponding
regression discontinuity plots (shown in Web Appendix Figure W-1) conﬁrms the conclusion that
pre-determined characteristics change very little at the thresholds.
A second standard way of testing the RD assumption is to look at the smoothness of the density
of unemployment spells around the cutoffs. Figure II (a) shows the number of spells in two-week
age intervals. On average, there are around 4300 spells in each interval up until age 47, after which
the number of spells begins to decrease. It appears that at each cutoff there is a slight increase in the
density in the bin directly on the right of the cutoff. Implementing the test proposed by McCrary
(2008), this increase is statistically signiﬁcant at the ﬁve percent level for the 42-year and 49-year
cutoff but of very small magnitude.
Such an increase could either occur because workers wait until their birthday before claiming
15

UI beneﬁts, because the probability of claiming UI rises with potential durations, or because ﬁrms
are more likely to lay off worker with higher potential UI durations. To see whether workers wait
before claiming UI until they are eligible for extended UI durations, column (1) of Table III below
shows how the time between job loss and ﬁrst take-up of UI beneﬁts varies around the threshold.
This provides no indication that people who claim UI to after the threshold have waited longer to
claim than the people who had claimed before it. This is consistent with the quite small change
in the density right around the cutoff we found. Only individuals relatively close to the age cutoff
have economic incentives to wait until after their birthday to claim beneﬁts. Taking into account
that an individual does not receive UI until claiming, if one ignores the possibility of receiving UA
after the end of UI and assumes zero discounting, one can show that the average individual (i.e., for
whom the survivor function of remaining in nonemployment is the same as the empirical survivor
function in the sample) could have an incentive to wait for up to 3.5 months. Taking UA beneﬁts
and discounting into account reduces these incentives. We show in the Web Appendix (Section
3.5) that the presence of UA beneﬁts approximately reduces the months worth waiting by half. In
combination with behavioral explanations, this may be the reason for the small amount of waiting
we observe. To directly assess the potential impact of waiting, we also re-estimated our models
after dropping UI spells with longer gaps between job ending and claiming (Web Appendix Table
W-4 and Table V). This had no effect on the results.
To assess whether ﬁrms selectively lay off workers eligible for higher beneﬁt durations, in
Figure II (b) we show the density of spells with respect to the dates the previous job ended. If
ﬁrms are more likely to lay off workers with higher UI beneﬁts, the discontinuity should appear
in this ﬁgure as well. Again there appear to be slight outliers immediately to the right of the 42-
year and 49-year cutoffs, but less clearly as in Figure II (a). If anything, this could indicate that
ﬁrms are waiting for a short time to lay off workers until they are eligible to higher UI beneﬁt
levels. However, it does not appear that ﬁrms are systematically more likely to lay off workers
with higher levels of UI beneﬁts, since, in such a case, the density would shift up permanently.
To ascertain that the small shift in the density of the age of layoff does not affect our results, we
16

follow Card, Chetty, and Weber (2007a) and replicate our ﬁndings with new UI spells that originate
from employers experiencing multiple layoffs who hence have less scope for selectively laying off
workers (Web Appendix Tables W-16 and W-17). All our results are robust to this extension.
Overall, it appears that the discontinuity in the density is driven by, maximally, a few hundred
spells shifted to the right just around the cutoffs. This is relative to around 450,000 spells in each
of the four-year intervals. As an additional, conservative approach to assessing the impact of this
change in density, we calculated bounds on our coefﬁcients. For this purpose, we picked a number
of workers equal to the excess mass in the density above the threshold and reassigned them to
the left hand side of the threshold. To simulate the extreme case that workers with long potential
nonemployment spells selectively deferred ﬁling claims in order to receive higher UI durations, we
purposefully reallocated those workers with the highest nonemployment durations in our sample.
This provided very conservative lower bounds of the treatment effect. We used a symmetrical
approach to obtain upper bounds of the effect (assuming the excess mass is selected based on
shorter nonemployment durations). As further discussed below, this exercise yielded relatively
tight bounds and hence conﬁrmed that even extreme effects of selection would not overturn our
results.
Overall, since the magnitude of the change in the density is very small (in particular relative
to the size of our nonemployment results) and there are essentially no discontinuities in other
variables we do not think this is a threat to the validity of our main estimates. As a robustness
check, we estimated all our main results below, excluding observations within one month of the
cutoffs (Web Appendix Tables W-2 and W-3). This has virtually no effect on the magnitude of
the coefﬁcient at age 42 and a very small effect on the other two coefﬁcients. Furthermore we
estimated our main speciﬁcations controlling for observables, and again obtained virtually the
same coefﬁcients.
17

IV
THE EFFECT OF UI EXTENSIONS ON LABOR SUPPLY OVER THE BUSINESS CYCLE
IV.A
The Average Effect of Large Extensions of UI Durations
Our ﬁrst set of results pertain to the effect of large increases in potential UI duration on actual
take-up of UI and labor supply pooled over all years. Of interest in their own right, these ﬁnd-
ings provide a benchmark for our main analysis and interpretation of differences in the effect of
UI extensions over the business cycle. Our main ﬁnding is that the labor supply effects of poten-
tial UI duration implied by our regression discontinuity estimates are modest, similar across age
thresholds, smaller than the response of actual durations of UI beneﬁts, and consistent with the
theoretical model outlined in Section II.
Figure III (a) shows how the duration of UI receipt varies with age at the beginning of the
unemployment spell. The ﬁgure implies that a large number of individuals are substantially af-
fected by the increase in potential UI durations. Workers younger than 42 when claiming UI are
eligible to 12 months of UI beneﬁts, of which they use an average of 6.7 months. At the 42-year
threshold, UI eligibility increases to 18 months and the average duration or UI receipt increases
to about 8.5 months. The increases in beneﬁt receipt duration at the other cutoffs are also quite
substantial. They range from one fourth (at the 44-year cutoff) to one third (at the 49-year cut-
off) of the increase in the maximum UI durations. The effects of the large UI extensions at the
age thresholds on nonemployment durations are shown in Figure III (b). There is a clear jump in
nonemployment durations at the age 42 cutoff from about 15.6 to 16.4 months of nonemployment.
At age 44, nonemployment durations increase from 16.5 to 16.9 months and, at age 49, from 19.9
to 20.3. Thus, visual evidence suggests that the UI exten