NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DO EMPLOYMENT PROTECTIONS REDUCE PRODUCTIVITY? EVIDENCE FROM
U.S. STATES
David H. Autor
William R. Kerr
Adriana D. Kugler
Working Paper 12860
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12860
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2007
E-mails: dautor@mit.edu, wkerr@hbs.edu and adkugler@uh.edu. The research in this paper was conducted
while the authors were Special Sworn Status researchers of the U.S. Census Bureau at the Boston Census
Research Data Center (BRDC). Support for this research from NSF grant (ITR-0427889) is gratefully
acknowledged. Research results and conclusions expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the Census Bureau. This paper has been screened to insure that no confidential
data are revealed. We are grateful to seminar participants at the IZA Conference on Employment Protection
and Labor Markets, the Census Bureau RDC Conference, MIT, NBER Labor and Productivity Groups,
SOLE, and AEA and, especially, to Daron Acemoglu, Josh Angrist, Giuseppe Bertola, Bjorn Brugemann,
and Paul Oyer for their comments. Autor acknowledges generous support from the National Science
Foundation (CAREER SES-0239538) and the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation. Kugler acknowledges support
from a GEAR grant from the University of Houston. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2007 by David H. Autor, William R. Kerr, and Adriana D. Kugler. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Do Employment Protections Reduce Productivity? Evidence from U.S. States
David H. Autor, William R. Kerr, and Adriana D. Kugler
NBER Working Paper No. 12860
January 2007
JEL No. J21,J32,J38,J63,J83,J88,K12,K31
ABSTRACT
Theory predicts that mandated employment protections may reduce productivity by distorting production
choices. Firms facing (non-Coasean) worker dismissal costs will curtail hiring below efficient levels
and retain unproductive workers, both of which should affect productivity. These theoretical predictions
have rarely been tested. We use the adoption of wrongful-discharge protections by U.S. state courts
over the last three decades to evaluate the link between dismissal costs and productivity. Drawing
on establishment-level data from the Annual Survey of Manufacturers and the Longitudinal Business
Database, our estimates suggest that wrongful-discharge protections reduce employment flows and
firm entry rates. Moreover, analysis of plant-level data provides evidence of capital deepening and
a decline in total factor productivity following the introduction of wrongful-discharge protections.
This last result is potentially quite important, suggesting that mandated employment protections reduce
productive efficiency as theory would suggest. However, our analysis also presents some puzzles including,
most significantly, evidence of strong employment growth following adoption of dismissal protections.
In light of these puzzles, we read our findings as suggestive but tentative.
David H. Autor
Department of Economics
MIT, E52-371
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
dautor@mit.edu
William R. Kerr
Rock Center 212
Harvard Business School
Boston, MA 02163
wkerr@hbs.edu
Adriana D. Kugler
University of Houston
Department of Economics
204 McElhinney Hall
Houston, TX 77204-5019
and NBER
adkugler@uh.edu

1
Introduction
An extensive literature explores the impact of dismissal costs— also frequently called …ring costs
or employment protection— on the operation of labor markets. Beginning with the seminal work
of Lazear (1990), much research has focused on assessing how dismissal costs a¤ect employment
levels. Theory suggests, however, that dismissal costs may have ambiguous e¤ects on employment
levels. Dismissal costs act as a tax on …ring, which reduces dismissals but also reduces hiring.
The net e¤ect of these o¤setting factors is ambiguous, at least in the short run. It is perhaps not
surprising therefore that the empirical literature has found widely varying e¤ects of dismissal costs
on employment levels.
By contrast, theory makes a clear prediction about the impact of dismissal costs on the e¢ ciency
of hiring and …ring. Provided that dismissal protections are not undone by Coasean bargaining,
dismissal protections raise …rms’adjustments costs. Consequently, …rms will …nd it optimal not
to hire workers whose short-term marginal product exceeds their market wage and will choose to
retain unproductive workers whose wage exceeds their productivity (cf. Blanchard and Portugal
2001). These distortions in production choices unambiguously reduce worker ‡ows. They are also
likely to cause …rms to substitute capital for labor and have the potential to reduce productivity
by distorting production choices.
This paper evaluates whether, and to what extent, the introduction of dismissal costs a¤ects
…rms’production choices and, ultimately, their productivity. The source of variation in dismissal
costs that we exploit is the adoption of wrongful discharge protections by U.S. state courts from the
late 1970s to the early 1990s. These common-law protections against wrongful discharge generated a
‡ood of litigation in adopting states and increased the uncertainty and potential cost of discharging
workers. As has been established in prior work using both household survey data and aggregate
state-level employment data, adoption of wrongful discharge laws had measurable e¤ects on state
employment levels, unemployment-to-employment ‡ows, and the outsourcing of jobs to temporary
help employers (cf. Miles 2000; Schanzenbach 2003; Autor 2003; Autor et al. 2004 and 2006; Kugler
and Saint Paul 2004). Yet, these aggregate e¤ects have rarely been explored using representative
1

microdata on …rms, nor have their consequences for productivity been assessed.1
In this paper, we simultaneously analyze the consequences of employment protections for
establishment-level employment ‡ows and productivity. We …rst test whether dismissal costs re-
duce employment volatility— a necessary implication of any standard non-Coasean model— both at
the extensive (entry/exit) margin and intensive (within-plant) margin. We next assess whether any
reduction in employment volatility is accompanied by a reduction in productivity.
Our analysis exploits detailed, comprehensive establishment-level data from two Census Bureau
surveys: the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD) and the Annual Survey of Manufacturers
(ASM). Sourced from U.S. tax records and Census surveys, the LBD provides annual employment
and payroll information on all U.S. private establishments in most lines of business. The LBD is
thus an exceptional resource for identifying the e¤ects of dismissal costs on how …rms adjust their
labor inputs; its employment and wage records cannot, however, facilitate a further study of the
concomitant adjustments of other factors of production and the consequences for productivity. We
thus complement the LBD with a balanced panel of ‘ongoing’manufacturing plants continuously
surveyed by the ASM. We …rst demonstrate that the impact of dismissal costs on employment
adjustment within this panel mirrors the LBD manufacturing universe, and then turn to the ASM’s
detailed operating data (e.g., output, capital investment, employment) to study extensively the
important productivity outcomes.
We …nd that one of the three dismissal protections adopted during this period, the Covenant of
Good Faith and Fair Dealing (‘good faith’hereafter), reduced annual employment ‡uctuations and
the entry of new establishments in adopting states. Consistent with the apparent rise in adjustment
costs, we document that …rms in adopting states engaged in capital deepening, leading to a concur-
rent rise in labor productivity. Notably, we …nd evidence of a decline in total factor productivity
following adoption of the good faith exception. Our e¤ects are strongest in the short-run, peaking
around three years after the adoption and declining afterwards. These results suggest that adop-
1In contemporaneous work, Bird and Knopf (2005) analyze the e¤ects of wrongful-discharge protections on the
earnings, pro…tability and e¢ ciency of the U.S. banking sector from 1980 to 1990. They conclude that adoption
of wrongful-discharge protections raised wages, reduced pro…ts and lowered productivity in this sector. Petrin and
Sivadasan (2006) introduce and implement a novel framework for estimating the e¤ects of employment protection
legislation on productivity, focusing on its impact on the gap between workers’marginal revenue product and the
wage. Using data from Chile, they …nd that increases in …ring costs raise this gap. Prieger (2005) examines the
impact of the Americans with Disabilities Act on the entry and exit of …rms in retail.
2

tion of dismissal protections altered short-run production choices and caused employers to retain
unproductive workers, leading to a reduction in technical e¢ ciency. Clouding the interpretation of
these results, however, is the …nding that adoption of the good faith exception is associated with
implausibly large subsequent growth in manufacturing employment. This pattern suggests that
our results may be partly contaminated by confounding economic shocks. Thus, while our analysis
provides novel direct evidence that employment protections may reduce …rm-level productivity,
the results must be viewed as tentative. It is our hope that future studies will provide further
exploration of these initial results.
2
Wrongful Discharge Protections in the United States
The U.S. has long had a legal presumption that workers and employers may freely terminate their
employment relationships ‘at will,’ that is without noti…cation, …nancial penalty or requirement
to demonstrate good (or any) cause. This legal doctrine, referred to as employment-at-will, was
…rst articulated by the Tennessee Supreme Court in 1884 and was subsequently adopted into the
common law by almost all U.S. state courts by the mid 1930s (cf. Morriss 1994).2
Beginning in the 1970s, the legal consensus supporting employment-at-will eroded rapidly. In
a series of precedent-setting cases between 1972 and 1992, the vast majority of U.S. state courts
adopted one or more common-law exceptions to the employment-at-will doctrine. These exceptions
constrained the ability of employers operating in adopting states to terminate workers ‘at will.’
These common-law exceptions are typically classi…ed into three categories: 1) the implied covenant
of good faith and fair dealing (‘good faith’exception); 2) the tort of wrongful discharge in violation
of public policy (‘public policy’exception); and 3) the implied-in-fact contract not to terminate
without good cause (‘implied contract’exception).3 We summarize these exceptions here and refer
2Idaho, New Jersey and New Mexico adopted employment-at-will in 1948, 1953 and 1968, respectively. Prior to
Idaho, the most recent was Wyoming in 1937. Montana is the only state to have implemented exceptions to the
employment-at-will doctrine by statute rather than common law (cf. Ewing et al. 2005).
3For detailed discussion of the evolution of the employment-at-will doctrine, see Morriss (1994 and 1995), Autor
(2003), Kugler and Saint Paul (2004) and Autor et al. (2006). Our discussion draws particularly on the latter work,
which contains (at present) the most current legal analysis. Legal scholars, including most notably Dertouzos and
Karoly (1992), also categorize these exceptions according to whether they allow for tortious damages (i.e., pain,
su¤ering, and possibly punitive damages) in addition to contractual damages (i.e., exclusively economic losses).
Recent work has not found that this distinction is empirically relevant (cf. Autor et al. 2006), however, and hence
we focus on the three categories of legal exception.
3

the reader to Autor et al. (2006) for an extended discussion.
Read broadly, the good faith exception prohibits employers from …ring workers for ‘bad cause.’
The de…nition of ‘bad cause,’however, varies greatly by state and over time. The California Court of
Appeals’famous 1980 good faith ruling in Cleary v. American Airlines4— likely the most in‡uential
of all good faith cases— was initially understood to bar California employers from terminating any
worker without good cause.
However, the California Supreme Court’s 1988 ruling in Foley v.
Interactive Data Corp vastly reduced the scope of the Cleary decision and limited the …nancial
remedies available to plainti¤s.5 At present, all eleven state courts that recognize the good faith
exception (including California) primarily limit awards to ‘timing’ cases in which the employer
intentionally terminates a worker to deprive her of a promised bene…t (e.g., a sales commission
or non-vested pension). Hence, ‘bad cause’under the good faith exception is currently construed
narrowly, though this was not always the case.
The public policy exception, recognized by 43 states as of 1999, provides workers with protec-
tions against discharges that would inhibit them from acting in accordance with public policy. In
states recognizing the public policy exception, workers may, for example, litigate if they are …red for
performing jury duty, …ling a worker’s compensation claim, reporting an employer’s wrongdoing, or
refusing to commit perjury on behalf of the employer. Because courts typically limit public policy
cases to clear violations of explicit legislative commands, rather than violations of a vaguer sense
of public obligation, the public policy exception is not generally thought to impose substantial
constraints on employer behavior.
The implied contract exception, also recognized by 43 states in 1999, comes into force when
an employer implicitly promises not to terminate a worker without good cause.
Such implicit
promises may include, for example: personnel manuals stating that the employer’s policy is to
terminate employees only for just cause; expectations arising from a worker’s longevity of service or
history of promotions and salary increases; and usual company practices that preclude terminating
workers without good cause.
The expected economic impact of the implied contract exception
4168 Cal. Rptr. 722 (Cal. Ct. App. 1980 October).
5765 P.2d 373 (Cal.
1988).
Whereas the Cleary decision permitted plainti¤s to recover tortious damages for
violations of the good faith doctrine, Foley reduced these damages to contractual losses (cf. Jung and Harkness
1989).
4

is hard to gauge. On the one hand, employers can potentially ‘contract around’ this exception
simply by rewording personnel manuals and adding explicit language to employment contracts to
state that all employees remain ‘at will.’6 On the other hand, …rms without sophisticated human
resources sta¤ may be unaware of the implied contract exception or lack the expertise to fully
insulate themselves from its reach. Additionally, the implied contract exception can potentially
reclassify an employer’s entire workforce as not ‘at will,’which may impose signi…cant costs.
To assess the e¤ects of these employment-at-will exceptions on productivity and employment
outcomes, we adopt a di¤erence-in-di¤erence approach that contrasts state-level change in out-
comes in adopting states to contemporaneous changes in outcomes in non-adopting states. This
treatment-control contrast identi…es the average causal e¤ect of the exceptions on the outcomes
of interest under the assumption that these outcomes would have otherwise evolved similarly in
adopting and non-adopting states. We take a number of steps to buttress the robustness of this
statistical approach. All econometric models include industry or industry-by-year …xed e¤ects (in
addition to state …xed e¤ects) to absorb industry-wide shocks that may be correlated across states.
In addition, most speci…cations include state-speci…c linear time trends to account for possible
pre-existing trends that may predate the adoption of employment-at-will exceptions and could oth-
erwise be confounded with adoption. Some speci…cations further include plant …xed e¤ects, where
identi…cation comes from contrasts of within-plant changes in outcomes in adopting relative to
non-adopting states. As a falsi…cation test, we also estimate dynamic models that contrast changes
in outcomes in years prior to and following adoption of exceptions to provide a check on the pos-
sibility that adoption of employment-at-will exceptions are caused by changes in outcomes rather
than vice-versa.
Figure 1 plots the number of states recognizing each of the three exceptions during the time
period of 1970 to 1999 (at monthly frequency).7 Two main points are visible. First, the public
policy and implied contract exceptions are far more widely recognized than the good faith exception.
6And indeed, large employers took such steps. The Bureau of National A¤airs (1985) found that 63 percent of
large employers surveyed in the early 1980s had recently “removed or changed wording in company publications to
avoid any suggestion of an employment contract,”and 53 percent had “added wording to applications and handbooks
specifying that employment may be terminated for any reason.”Sutton and Dobbin (1996) report that the percentage
of …rms using ‘at will’clauses in employment contracts increased from 0 to 29 percent between 1955 and 1985.
7The dips in the series re‡ect court reversals of doctrines that were previously recognized.
5

Second, adoption of each exception appears to follow something of a contagion pattern, with a
large number of adoptions occurring in rapid succession between 1976 and 1988, followed by near-
stasis from 1988 forward. This pattern suggests that adoptions that cannot be viewed as fully
independent, but that a widespread change in legal thinking in the 1970s and 1980s led many
state courts to amend the longstanding doctrine of employment-at-will at around the same time.
This potentially presents a challenge for identi…cation in that businesses might react in advance to
anticipated changes in the legal environment, thus blurring the pre-post contrast. However, the date
at which a state adopts a given exception is an idiosyncratic function of the cases brought before
state high courts and the disposition of the sitting judges. Many states never adopt exceptions
and others reverse or amend these exceptions after adoption. Accordingly, precedent-setting cases
that generate exceptions to employment-at-will typically will provide a discrete element of surprise.
This is particularly likely to be true for the good faith exception, which was adopted more slowly
and less extensively than either the public policy or implied contract exceptions.
As emphasized by Autor et al. (2006), it is likely that a substantial component of the economic
cost of the employment-at-will exceptions emanates from the uncertainty they introduced into the
employment relationship. When most exceptions were adopted in the late 1970s through late 1980s,
the volume and cost of wrongful discharge litigation that would ultimately ensue was unknown to
…rms and potential litigants. Adding to the uncertainty, personnel and professional law journals
(i.e., the trade publications relied upon by personnel managers and corporate attorneys) published
numerous articles that appeared to overstate the scope of the protections a¤orded to workers and
the penalties that …rms would incur for violating them (cf. Edelman et al. 1992). Because employers
were potentially led to anticipate greater constraints and costs than ultimately materialized, Autor
et al. (2006) argue that the short-term and medium-term e¤ects of these dismissal protections may
have exceeded their ‘steady-state’e¤ects, and they present evidence consistent with this hypothesis.
Several prior studies have analyzed the e¤ects of employment-at-will exceptions on labor market
outcomes. The …rst study in this vein, Dertouzos and Karoly (1992), found using aggregate state-
level data that adoption of common-law dismissal protections reduced state employment levels by
as much as seven percent. Subsequent analyses by Miles (2000), Schanzenbach (2003) and Autor
et al. (2004 and 2006) using industry-level and household-level data do not con…rm these results,
6

however. These more recent studies …nd either modest negative e¤ects (Autor et al., Schanzenbach)
or no e¤ects of dismissal protections on employment levels (Miles). As noted above, however, theory
makes ambiguous predictions about the impact of dismissal costs on employment levels.
A number of studies also provide evidence that states’adoption of dismissal protections raised
hiring and …ring costs. Miles (2000) and Autor (2003) show that employers in adopting states substi-
tuted temporary help agency workers for direct-hire employees, presumably in an e¤ort to minimize
litigation risks.8 Kugler and Saint-Paul (2004) …nd using the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth
that these protections (especially the good faith exception) reduced the re-employment probability
of unemployed relative to employed workers, suggesting that dismissal protections exacerbated ad-
verse selection into non-employment. Both sets of …ndings are signi…cant for our work because they
demonstrate that the adoption of dismissal protections raised …rms’adjustment costs— a necessary
condition for them to have had productivity impacts.
Our study builds on this prior work in two major respects. First, use of establishment-level data
provides direct evidence on the e¤ects of dismissal protections on …rms’employment adjustments at
both the extensive (plant opening/closing) and intensive (job ‡ows) margins. Second, we directly
evaluate the consequences of dismissal protections for establishment-level production choices and
realized productivity.
3
Theoretical Considerations
In a standard competitive model of the labor market, employment protections are economically
equivalent to mandated employment bene…ts. Bene…t mandates raise the cost of employing workers,
leading to an inward shift in labor demand. If, however, workers value the mandated bene…t at
its marginal cost of provision— that is, the mandate is e¢ cient— then the Coase theorem applies.
Labor supply shifts outward to o¤set the inward shift in labor demand, employment levels are
unchanged and wages fall to cover exactly the cost of the bene…t (cf. Summers 1989; Lazear 1990).
There are no productivity or employment consequences.9
8The implied contract exception in particular confers a comparative advantage on temporary help agencies since
these …rms are universally understood to o¤er only short-term employment. It is the implied contract exception that
appears primarily responsible for the growth of temporary help agency employment (cf. Autor 2003).
9Aghion and Hermalin (1990) and Levine (1991) present models in which dismissal protections are under-provided
by the private market due to adverse selection. Bertola (2004) also presents a model in which dismissal costs are under-
7

Mandatory dismissal protections can impose e¢ ciency costs in the competitive model, however.
If workers value dismissal protections at less than their marginal cost of provision— or, equivalently,
if some share of the termination bene…t accrues to a third-party, such as an attorney— the bene…t
mandate drives a wedge between the private and social cost of job separations, yielding a dead-
weight loss. Because dismissal costs are only paid when workers and …rms separate, the deadweight
loss component of the dismissal cost functions as a tax on separations— an adjustment cost. Con-
sider, for example, a case where a worker’s marginal product falls below his wage and the wage
cannot drop su¢ ciently to compensate the …rm (either due to a non-negativity constraint or due
to downward wage rigidities). If the worker values the dismissal bene…t at its marginal cost, both
the worker and the …rm will agree to terminate the job. If the payment of the dismissal bene…t
incurs a deadweight loss, however, both the worker and the …rm will …nd it optimal to continue the
employment relationship so long as the present value of the productivity shortfall is less than the
deadweight loss. Consequently, ine¢ cient dismissal protections— that is, protections that workers
value at less than cost— inhibit e¢ cient job separations (and, indirectly, reduce e¢ cient accessions
as well).
In the competitive model, these ine¢ cient dismissal protections unambiguously reduce allocative
e¢ ciency— that is, they are welfare reducing.
Their implications for the technical e¢ ciency of
production are less clear cut. If dismissal protections cause …rms to retain (some) unproductive
workers, this will cause a decline in labor productivity, ceteris paribus. O¤setting this factor, …rms
may screen new hires more stringently, leading to a favorable compositional shift in the productivity
of the employed workforce. Moreover, because ine¢ cient dismissal protections provide …rms with
an incentive to substitute from labor to other factors of production, capital deepening may also
raise the marginal product of labor. Hence, the net impact on technical e¢ ciency (as opposed to
allocative e¢ ciency) is ambiguous.
While many labor economists use this competitive model as a benchmark, much of the macro-
provided due to risk-aversion. Agell (1999) discusses why eliminating dismissal protections may not be desirable when
labor markets are subject to fairness considerations and market imperfections, while Wasmer (2006) and Macleod
and Nakavachara (2006) focus on human capital investment. In all these cases, dismissal protection mandates can be
e¢ ciency-enhancing since workers may value these protections above their cost of provision. In the Coasean model,
this would imply that imposing the mandate would raise employment levels. See Saint-Paul (2002) and Brügemann
(2006) for theories on the political economy of employment protection.
8

economic literature views employment protection through the lens of the Diamond-Mortensen-
Pissarides equilibrium unemployment model (cf.
Mortensen and Pissarides 1994; Kugler et al.
2003). As in the competitive model, dismissal costs in the equilibrium unemployment model cur-
tail e¢ cient separations by reducing the threshold productivity at which …rms are willing to dismiss
workers, thus reducing productivity. In contrast to the competitive model, however, worker-…rm
matches in the equilibrium unemployment setting generate quasi-rents, and the allocation of rents
between …rms and workers is typically determined through Nash bargaining.
Nash bargaining
exacerbates the deadweight loss from ine¢ cient employment protections.10 In the Nash bargain,
dismissal costs reduce the …rms’outside options or ‘threat points,’causing workers’wage demands
to rise even as pro…ts fall. Facing lower pro…ts and higher wage demands, …rms curtail job creation
and increase the threshold productivity at which they are willing to hire. The induced rise in reser-
vation productivity potentially leads to an increase in …rm-level productivity since less productive
matches are not realized.11 Hence, the net productivity e¤ect is again ambiguous.
Although the competitive and equilibrium unemployment models di¤er in their details, both
imply that dismissal protections dampen employment adjustments but have ambiguous e¤ects
on …rms’ productivity.
On the other hand, both models indicate that if dismissal protections
do not reduce job ‡ows (perhaps because they satisfy Coasean equivalence), these protections
should not a¤ect productivity. These theoretical observations motivate our empirical approach.
We begin by assessing whether adoptions of exceptions to the employment-at-will doctrine reduce
job ‡ows. We next turn to an analysis of their consequences for …rm productivity. Because of
the many possible avenues of adjustment noted above, our empirical work examines the impacts
of dismissal protections on multiple plant-level production outcomes including capital investment,
capital intensity, labor productivity and total factor productivity.
10Nash bargaining ampli…es ine¢ ciencies because it is non-Coasean; the initial allocation of property rights a¤ects
both the distribution of resources and the e¢ ciency of bargained outcomes (cf. Grout 1984).
11Although productivity impacts are ambiguous, welfare consequences are generally negative, as in the competitive
case above. If the search equilibrium is not initially constrained e¢ cient, however, it is possible for policy interventions
to improve aggregate e¢ ciency (cf. Pissarides 2000, chapter 8).
9

4
Data Description
Establishment-level data are essential for characterizing how …rms and their associated establish-
ments respond to the passage of dismissal protections. This project draws such data from two
con…dential surveys collected by the Census Bureau— the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD)
and the Annual Survey of Manufacturers (ASM). Each survey is described below, and Table 1
provides descriptive statistics.
4.1
Longitudinal Business Database
The LBD is a unique source for studying employment dynamics across manufacturing and non-
manufacturing sectors. Sourced from IRS tax data and Census surveys, the LBD annually covers
approximately 3.9 million establishments with positive employment, representing over 68 million
employees, in most U.S. private industries. Panel A of Table 1 highlights that most of the LBD’s
surveyed employees are in the manufacturing, retail trade and services sectors. These percentages
are fairly similar for states passing dismissal protections and those not doing so.12
The microdata …rst facilitate the development of complete state-industry-year panels of employ-
ment by summing employment counts across individual establishments. Publicly available series
normally do not provide employment counts by state-industry; even when they do so, the Census
Bureau is required to suppress values that compromise the con…dentiality of individual establish-
ments. Building from the microdata overcomes these limitations and a full employment panel is
developed for the 1976 to 1999 sample frame.
From this state-industry-year panel, we can estimate absolute year-over-year employment changes.
The mean absolute employment change over the sample is approximately 11 percent. This absolute
job turnover metric aggregates over employment adjustments on the intensive margin (i.e., the
hiring and …ring of workers by continuing establishments) and the entry/exit margin. In the LBD,
establishments are assigned unique and time-invariant identi…ers that further a¤ord longitudinal
estimations of these two dimensions of adjustment. The entry and exit rates for establishments are
12The LBD’s sample frame during the 1976 to 1999 period includes mining; construction; manufacturing; wholesale
trade; retail trade; and services (except hospitals, education services, social services, and private households). Sectors
not included for the full panel are agriculture, forestry and …shing; transportation and public utilities; …nance,
insurance and real estate; and public administration. Jarmin and Miranda (2002) describe the construction of the
LBD.
10

approximately 13 percent and 11 percent, respectively. As many entering and exiting establish-
ments are very small in size, only 7 percent and 6 percent of employees are working in entering or
exiting establishments, respectively.13 Finally, the survey’s reporting structure a¤ords the linkage
of establishments to their parent …rms. Approximately 22 percent of establishments and 55 percent
of employees are part of multi-unit …rms.
4.2
Annual Survey of Manufacturers
While the LBD provides a comprehensive view of employment dynamics across manufacturing and
non-manufacturing sectors, reported data are limited to total employment and payroll only. To
evaluate the impact of reduced job turnover for capital and productivity outcomes, we turn to two
detailed surveys of manufacturers undertaken by the Census Bureau. The Census of Manufacturers
(CM) collects operating data on all U.S. manufacturing plants at …ve-year intervals (i.e., 1972, 1977,
and so on). In between the CMs, the Census Bureau conducts the Annual Survey of Manufacturers
(ASM). The ASM is a probability sampled subset of the CM, with the panel redrawn two years after
each CM. Plants with more than 250 employees in the previous CM are sampled with certainty.
We extract from the ASM a balanced panel of all plants continuously monitored from 1972 to
1999. This restriction focuses on intensive adjustments in large plants operating in stable business
climates; by conditioning on survival, the extensive margin is suppressed. While the approximately
5700 plants represent less than 2 percent of all U.S. manufacturing establishments, they account for
over a quarter of total manufacturing activity in terms of employments and shipments. Almost all
of these plants are part of multi-unit …rms, although not all of the plants have sister establishments
within this balanced panel.
Year-over-year employment changes are again studied. While the average annual employment
change is again 11 percent, a larger fraction of these changes are negative, re‡ecting the trend decline
in manufacturing employment from 1976 to 1999. In addition, the more detailed employment data
for manufacturers allow us to examine production and non-production workers separately; the mean
non-production worker employment share is 26 percent.
The continuous monitoring of this ASM panel a¤ords the calculation of detailed capital stocks
13Dunne et al.
(1989) and Kerr and Nanda (2006) provide additional descriptive statistics on entry and exit
patterns in the manufacturing and non-manufacturing sectors, respectively.
11

and productivity metrics. Capital stocks are calculated with the perpetual inventory method, as
explained below. The mean plant-level capital stock for the 1976 to 1999 sample is $31m in 1999
dollars. Labor productivity is de…ned as de‡ated total value of shipments divided by total plant
employment. Finally, we estimate total factor productivity (TFP) as the residual from a production
function of value-added on four factors: production workers, non-production workers, machinery
capital, and structures capital.
5
Consequences of Employment Protections
In this section we discuss the impact of wrongful discharge protections on …rm behavior. We begin
by examining the …rst-order e¤ect of employment protections on employment ‡uctuations, both
at the intensive (within-establishment) and extensive (entry/exit) margins. If wrongful discharge
protections increase adjustment costs, this should lead to a reduction in hiring and dismissals,
resulting in an overall dampening of employment ‡uctuations. We next test the impact of employ-
ment protections on employment levels, a margin along which prior research has obtained mixed
results. Finally, we turn to the important question of whether the possibly restricted ability of busi-
nesses to adjust employment due to the introduction of employment protections has productivity
consequences.
5.1
E¤ects on Employment Fluctuations
We estimate the e¤ects of the wrongful discharge exceptions (i.e., good faith, public policy and
implied contract) described in Section (2) on employment ‡uctuations using both the LBD and
ASM. We begin by estimating the following equation using the LBD:
ABSsjt = s + j +  t + GF GFst 1 + PP PPst 1 + ICICst 1 + "sjt;
(1)
where ABSsjt is the absolute year-to-year employment change of a two-digit SIC sector j, in state
s, at time t,
ABSsjt = jEsjt   Esjt 1j
h (Esjt+Esjt 1)
2
i:
12

s, j and  t are vectors of state, industry and time e¤ects, respectively.14 GFst 1, PPst 1 and
ICst 1 are indicators of whether the good faith, public policy and implied contract exceptions were
in place in state s at time t   1.15 Thus, the coe¢ cients GF , PP and IC capture the e¤ects of
employment protections on annual net employment ‡ows.16
Our core battery of speci…cations also includes two estimations of greater stringency. First, we
consider models with state-speci…c time trends. These require that identi…cation come from the
discontinuity surrounding the passage of the wrongful discharge exception. These speci…cations can
provide reassurance that our coe¢ cients are not re‡ecting smoothly trending omitted variables that
are potentially correlated with the adoption of the exceptions. A bene…t of the state-industry panel
is that we can also control for industry-speci…c trends using the non-parametric form of two-digit
SIC industry and year interactions. These latter estimations allow us to control for employment
shifts due to national trends in a state’s industries, again providing con…dence in the identi…cation
strategy.
Panels A and B of Table 2 report estimates of the e¤ects of the wrongful discharge exceptions
on employment ‡uctuations for the Full Sample and for manufacturing only. Panel A includes
all LBD sectors: manufacturing, mining, construction, wholesale trade, retail trade and services.
The reported standard errors account for possible error correlations across …rms within a state and
within states over time. We weight the samples using the mean employment level in the state-
industry-year cells during the early 1976 to 1985 period. The results for the Full Sample show a
decline in employment ‡uctuations following the introduction of the good faith exception, though
the results are not statistically signi…cant. By contrast, the results for the public policy and implied
contract exceptions show insigni…cant positive impacts on employment ‡uctuations.
When we estimate these models for manufacturing alone in Panel B, we …nd a negative, and
in the majority of cases, signi…cant, e¤ect of the good faith exception on employment ‡uctuations.
14ABS is closely linked to Davis et al. (1996)’s job reallocation measure estimated at the sector level, which adds
the average positive changes in employment in a sector to the average negative changes in employment in a sector.
ABS is de…ned to be zero if both employments are zero. ABS is bounded between [0; 2], thereby minimizing the
in‡uence of outliers.
15The one-year lag from the survey date is due to employment counts in the LBD and ASM usually being measured
as of March 1st.
16In addition to the ABS measure, we estimated models that distinguish between positive and negative adjustments.
Since we were unable to reject the hypothesis that the results are symmetric on both margins, we suppress tabulation
of these results.
13

This result is robust to the inclusion of state-speci…c and industry-speci…c trends. It suggests a
reduction in employment ‡uctuations of 5 to 12 percent after the introduction of the good faith
exception (i.e., dividing the -0.006 to -0.016 coe¢ cients by the average annual employment change
of 13% in Table 1 for states adopting the good faith exception). The results for the implied contract
exception remains insigni…cant. Surprisingly, we …nd a positive and signi…cant impact of the public
policy doctrine on employment ‡uctuations in the LBD data.
This latter result, however, is not
supported in the upcoming analysis of the more accurate, establishment-level ASM panel.
The initial LBD analysis suggests a signi…cant e¤ect of the good faith exception on employment
‡uctuations in manufacturing. To test whether this …nding is consistent with a causal relationship,
we evaluate the relationship between the adoption of the good faith exception and employment
‡uctuations using a dynamic speci…cation:
ABSsjt
=
s + j +  t +
2
X
q= 5
GFt+qGFst+q +
2
X
q= 5
PPt+qPPst+q +
2
X
q= 5
ICt+qICst+q
+GFt 6GFst 6 + PPt 6PPst 6 + ICt 6ICst 6 + "sjt;
(2)
where GFst+q, PPst+q and ICst+q indicate whether adoption occurred at year t + q. These
dynamic variables capture the transitory e¤ects of the reforms. GFst 6, PPst 6 and ICst 6 estimate
long-term outcomes by indicating adoptions that occurred at year t 6 or before. These coe¢ cients
are relative to the period three years prior to the reform, and their pattern indicates whether the
earlier pre-post results (1) are consistent with a causal interpretation. In particular, we would be
concerned if there are large and statistically signi…cant coe¢ cients on the lead indicators, regardless
of whether they are positive or negative. The speci…cation also helps identify whether the largest
impacts of the exceptions occur over the short-run or long-run.17
Appendix Table 1 presents results from this dynamic speci…cation estimated for the manu-
facturing sector, as well as additional speci…cations including state-speci…c and industry-speci…c
trends. The basic speci…cation shows negative coe¢ cients for the good faith lags, but mostly in-
signi…cant and weakly positive coe¢ cients for the leads, thus supporting a causal interpretation of
our results. That is, the introduction of the exception precedes employment changes and not vice
17The dynamic estimations also include a second set of lead and lag variables to account for the four cases in
which legal exceptions were formally abandoned. The inclusion or exclusion of these additional regressors does not
materially in‡uence the reported results.
14

versa. By contrast, the public policy and implied contract leads and lags have typically positive
coe¢ cients. The pattern for the public policy doctrine is particularly noteworthy since it suggests
that the unexpected positive estimate for the impact of this doctrine on employment ‡uctuations
found in Table 2 is likely to be spurious. These patterns are robust to the inclusion of state-speci…c
and industry-speci…c trends. The results using the LBD suggest that the impact of the good faith
doctrine peaks approximately three years following adoption and that the long-term e¤ect is in-
signi…cant (i.e., six or more years following adoption). This pattern is comparable to Autor et al.
(2006), who report that the near-term e¤ects of adoption of wrongful discharge doctrines dissipate
within approximately …ve years, perhaps because the initial market uncertainty about the poten-
tially vast— but ultimately modest scope— of the protections o¤ered is resolved (cf. Edelman et al.
1992).18
Table 2’s results from the LBD suggest that manufacturing was particularly a¤ected by the
introduction of wrongful discharge exceptions, likely because manufacturing employment is highly
seasonal and highly cyclical, making dismissal protections particularly costly.19 We use plant-level
data from the ASM to further examine the e¤ects of employment protections in manufacturing.
Panel A of Table 3 presents analogous results to those using the LBD in Table 2. Because our ASM
sample uses a balanced panel of ongoing plants, we can now add plant …xed e¤ects to the prior
speci…cation, leading to the following estimating equation:
ABSpt = p +  t + GF GFst 1 + PP PPst 1 + ICICst 1 + "pt:
(3)
The dependent variable is the absolute year-to-year employment change in plant p from t   1 to
t; p is a plant …xed e¤ect. As before, we include state-speci…c and industry-speci…c trends. The
estimated standard errors again allow for error correlations across plants within states and within
states over time.20
18Only 13 states introduced good faith exceptions during the period studied. California introduced the …rst good
faith exception in a highly visible court ruling. Though our basic and dynamic LBD results on employment changes
are strongest for the full sample of states, the results are qualitatively similar but less precise when California is
excluded.
19The mean year-to-year turnover in manufacturing was 12%, compared to 10% in construction, 6% in wholesale
trade, 7% in retail trade, and 8% in services. Only mining had a higher annual turnover (27%). Regressions examining
the mining sector also …nd a substantial dampening of annual employment volatility following the adoption of the
good faith exception.
20We have also estimated analogous models using an unbalanced panel of ASM plants (i.e., not limited to those
15

Consistent with the LBD, the results using the ASM suggest that the good faith exception
reduces employment ‡uctuations. We do not …nd evidence, however, in the ASM sample that the
implied contract or public policy doctrines impact employment ‡uctuations. We estimate in Table
3A that the good faith exception reduces employment ‡uctuations by 1.5 to 4.5 percent, which
is about half the size of the estimate using the LBD data. While this …nding is only marginally
statistically signi…cant, supporting evidence from dynamic speci…cations below suggest that the
e¤ect is likely to be causal.
The di¤erence between the LBD and ASM results are explained in part by the fact that in the
ASM we can control for additional unobservable factors a¤ecting a plant’s employment ‡uctuations.
Contrasting Columns (4) and (6), with and without plant …xed e¤ects, we can see that excluding
plant e¤ects using our ASM sample implies a reduction of 5 percent in employment ‡uctuations as
opposed to 2 percent with plant e¤ects. As is shown in the next sections, the remaining di¤erences
between the estimates in the LBD and the ASM samples are likely due to the fact that the LBD
includes entering and exiting business while the ASM sample is composed of a balanced sample of
ongoing plants. The ASM analysis therefore excludes any e¤ect of wrongful discharge protections
on employment ‡uctuations occurring through entry and exit.
As with the LBD, we also estimate a dynamic speci…cation using ASM data. Table 3B presents
these estimates. Similar to the patterns found with the LBD, leads of the good faith exception are
found to have weakly positive and insigni…cant e¤ects on employment ‡uctuations while lags of the
good faith exception have negative e¤ects on employment changes. The maximum dampening is
again attained three years following adoption. As with the LBD estimates, the long-term impacts
are insigni…cant and, in the case of the ASM, weakly positive.21
Since employment protections may also a¤ect seasonal employment ‡uctuations (cf. Wolfers
2005), we also study a quarterly employment churn measure to complement the year-over-year
changes. In particular, we estimate equation (3) using as a dependent variable the following measure
continually operating). Findings from these models, which are qualitatively similar, are available from the authors
on request.
21As for the LBD results, the ASM …ndings are qualitatively similar but somewhat less precise when we exclude
California from our sample. As a complement to the panel estimations, similar results are found with lagged dependent
variable speci…cations that test for mean reversion.
16

of quarterly churn for production workers:22
PWChurnpt = PW max
pt
  PW min
pt

(PW max
pt
+PW min
pt )
2
;
where PW max
pt
and PW min
pt
are the maximum and the minimum quarterly production-worker em-
ployment in plant p in year t, respectively. As before we allow for state-speci…c and industry-speci…c
trends and cluster the standard errors on state.
Panel B of Table 3A shows results for these speci…cations. Estimates without state trends show
negative e¤ects of the good faith exception on seasonal adjustments of production workers, but
the results are not signi…cant and the e¤ects become positive when controlling for state trends.
Looking deeper, however, the results from the underlying dynamic speci…cations reported in Table
3C consistently show weakly positive coe¢ cients on the leads and negative coe¢ cients on the
lags. Moreover, the dampening is again most signi…cant three years after the adoption. Thus,
the dynamic speci…cations appear most consistent with a signi…cant causal e¤ect of the good faith
exception on seasonal employment ‡uctuations over the short-run to medium-run.
5.2
E¤ects on Entry and Exit
The di¤erence in the magnitudes of the estimated e¤ects of wrongful discharge exceptions on
employment ‡uctuations in the LBD and the ASM samples suggests that part of the reduction in
employment ‡uctuations observed following adoption of the good faith exception is explained by
changes in …rm entry and exit (i.e., the extensive employment margin). To evaluate the importance
of external adjustment, we use the LBD to estimate regressions similar to equation (1), where the
dependent variable is the log of the average count of plants over …ve-year intervals among continuing,
entering and exiting businesses. We use …ve-year averages to minimize the possibility of capturing
spurious entry and exit due to ‘ghosting’and reporting bumps observed surrounding Census years.
The wrongful discharge indicators take the value of one if the exceptions had been adopted as of
the midpoint of the …ve-year intervals.23
22The ASM does not collect quarterly employment for non-production workers. The plant-level ASM does not
allow us to separately estimate employment e¤ects by demographic group, as is feasible with data from household
surveys as in Kahn (2006).
23Annual regressions of entry and exit yield quantitatively similar results, though the magnitudes are smaller.
Studying entry and exit at …ve-year intervals avoids spurious peaks of entry and exit rates surrounding Census years,
17

Panels A through D of Table 4 report results of these regressions for total, continuing, entering
and exiting plants, respectively. Panel A shows little change in the total count of plants in response
to the introduction of any of the exceptions. However, Panels B through D show that in the case
of the good faith exception, this re‡ects countervailing forces among continuing and other plants.
Panel B shows an increase in plant survival af