Do Police Reduce Crime? Estimates using the 
Allocation of Police Forces after a Terrorist Attack 
Rafael Di Tella 
Harvard Business School 
and 
May 29, 2003 
Abstract 
Ernesto Schargrodsky' 
UTDT 
An important challenge in the crime literature is to isolate causal effects of police on 
crime. Following a terrorist attack on the main Jewish center in the city of Buenos 
Aires, Argentina, in July 1994, all Jewish institutions (including schools, 
synagogues, and clubs) were given 24-hour police protection. Thus, this hideous 
event induced a geographical allocation of police forces that can be presumed to be 
exogenous in a crime regression. Using data on the location of car thefts before and 
after the terrorist attack, we find a large deterrent effect of observable police presence 
on crime. The effect is local, with little or no appreciable impact outside the narrow 
area in which the police are deployed. 
JEL: K42 
Keywords: Crime, police, deterrence, natural experiment. 
• Rafael Di Tella, Harvard Business School, Boston, MA 02163, US, Tel: (617) 495-5048, 
rditella@hbs.edu. Ernesto Schargrodsky, UTDT, Miiiones 2177, (CI428ATG) Buenos Aires, Argentina, 
Tel: (54-1 I) 4784-0080, eschargr@utdt.edu. We thank Jushan Bai, Sebastian Galiani, Erzo Luttmer, Robert 
MacCulloch, Sarn Peltzman, Andrea Rotnitzky, several key infonnants, and seminar participants at the 2001 
AEA New Orleans meetings, Berkeley, Stanford, Econometric Society, LACEA, UTDT, UdeSA, CEMA, 
and UNLP for helpful suggestions. The second author thanks CREDPR at Stanford University for 
hospitality. Matias Cattaneo, Luciana Esquerro and Magali Junowicz provided excellent research 
assistance. The database and computer programs used in this paper will be available at 
http://www.people.hbs.edu/rditella and www.utdt.edu/-eschargr. 

I. Introduction 
Classical criminology assumes that criminals are rational beings who weigh the costs and 
benefits of their actions. Becker (1968) produced the first fully-fledged theory of crime 
based on rational behavior. His research led to a broad upsurge of articles about the 
economics of criminal behavior (see, for example, Ehrlich (1973), Witte (1980), 
McCormick and Tollison (1984), Ehrlich and Brower (1987), Andreoni (1991), Freeman 
(1996), Levitt (1997), Fajnzylber, Lederman and Loayza (2000), inter alia). One of the 
central predictions of Becker' s theory is that crime will decrease when police presence 
increases. A basic problem with this prediction is that it has largely failed to find 
empírical support. In a survey of the literature, Cameron (1988) reports that in 18 out of 
22 papers surveyed researchers found either a positive effect of police presence on crime 
or no relationship between these variables. More recent surveys by Marvell and Moody 
(1996) and Eck and Maguire (2000) reach similar conclusions, 80 percent of analyzed 
studies showing zero or positive effects of police presence on crime. 
There is, however, a serious endogeneity problem with these studies that arises 
from the simultaneous determination of crime and police presence (see Fisher and Nagin, 
1978). It is likely that the govemment of a city in which the crime rate increases will hire 
more police officers. Areas beset by high crime will thus end up with more police officers 
than areas with low crime rates, introducing a positive bias in the police coefficient in a 
crime regression. A central challenge in the crime literature has been to break this 
endogeneity in order to identify causal effects of police on crime. 
Two recent papers use a time-series strategy to address this problem. Using data 
for the United States, Marvell and Moody (1996) fmd Granger-causation between crime 
and police running in both directions. In a similar vein, Corman and Mocan (2000) 
exploit high-frequency data for New York City to show that increases in the number of 
police officers cause a reduction in one out of tive crime categories (specitically, 
burglary). Monthly data are used because hiring and training delays in the response ofthe 
police authority to an increase in crime will mitigate simultaneity bias present in low-
frequency data. In order to validly address the simultaneity concem, these identitication 

strategies depend, crucially, on the assumption that the authorities are unable to forecast 
crime-fighting needs.' 
Levitt (1997) develops a different approach using instrumental variables to break. 
simultaneity. He documents the presence of an electoral cycle in police hiring and uses 
the timing of gubematorial and mayoral elections to instrument for police presence in a 
pane! of 59 large V.S. cities from 1970-1992. Vsing 2SLS techniques, Levitt finds a 
negative and significant effect of police on violent crime. The pattem across individual 
crime categories is surprising, with murder exhibiting the largest (and the only 
significant) coefficient, and with very imprecise estimates for the categories in which the 
rational model is presumed to be more relevant (e.g., property crimes). Still, the validity 
of the instrument might be questioned. The timing of elections may affect crime by way 
of variables other than the number of police officers on the street. Levitt avoids some of 
these concems by controlling for the unemployment rate and public spending, although 
there are other channels through which elections might affect reported crime. Police effort 
and crime reporting (as well as police hiring) may also respond to the timing of elections, 
particularly ifthe police are the target ofpolitical manipulation. Similarly, the behavior of 
judges and prosecutors may be affected by e!ections, something that could logically 
reduce criminal activity during such times.2 
A more severe concem raised by McCrary (2002) is that Levitt's 2SLS estimates 
suffer from a computational error (see also Levitt's reply (2002)). When the mistak.e is 
corrected the replication results show no effect of police on crime at standard significance 
leveis. The state of the evidence leads Levitt (2002) to wonder: "If electoral cycles can 
provide no more than suggestive evidence of a causal impact of police on crime, are there 
other identification strategies that can do better?" 
1 Criminologists often emphasize the benefits of anticipating crime pattems. Bayley (1998), for example, 
states "The key assumption behind srnarter law enforcement is that crime is not evenly scattered through 
time and space. Police are not faced with meeting ali crime threats everywhere all the time. Instead, each 
forrn of crime displays a particular pattem which, if understood, provides opportunities for law 
enforcement." (Bayley (1998), page 174). On the allocation ofpolice resources to protect high crime areas. 
often called "hot spots", see, for example, Sherrnan, Gartin and Buerger (1989), and Sherrnan and Weisburd 
(1995). 
2 On the incentives faced by members of the judiciary see, for example, Posner (1993). 
2 

In this paper we present a different approach to estimate the causal effect of police 
on crime. On July 18, 1994 terrorists exploded a bomb that destroyed the Asociacion 
Mutual Israelita Argentina (A.M.l.A.), the main Jewish center in Argentina. Eighty-five 
people died and more than 300 were wounded in the attack. One week later the federal 
govemment assigned police protection to every Jewish and Muslim building in the 
country. Because the distribution ofthese institutions can be presumed to be exogenous in 
a crime regression, this hideous event constitutes a natural experiment whereby the 
simultaneous determination of crime and police presence can be broken.3 
We colIected information on the number ofmotor-vehicle thefts per block in three 
neighborhoods in Buenos Aires before and after the terrorist attack. The information 
covers the nine-month period beginning April 1 and ending December 31, 1994. We also 
colIected information on the location of each Jewish institution in these neighborhoods. 
We then estimated the effect of police presence on car theft. Our difference-in-differences 
estimates show that blocks that receive police protection experience significantly fewer 
car thefts than the rest of the neighborhoods. The effect is large. Relative to the control 
group, car thefts falI by 75% in the blocks in which the protected institutions are situated. 
However, the effect is extremely local. We fmd no evidence that police presence in a 
given block reduces car theft one or two blocks away from the protected buildings. 
In addition to the identification approach, our estimates have an important 
advantage over previous work. The literature reports considerable interest in identifying 
the mechanisms by which increased police presence reduces crime. Is it that greater 
numbers of police officers on the streets make criminal activity more risky (deterrence), 
or perhaps that the more police officers the more criminais are apprehended leaving fewer 
criminaIs to commit crimes (incapacitation)?4 In general, these two effects are quite 
difficult to distinguish using aggregate data. Being based on changes in crime levels in 
particular locations (i.e., the protected blocks) our approach cannot reflect changes in the 
J On natural and randomized experiments, see the discussions in LaLonde (1986), Angrist (1990), Angrist 
and Krueger (1991), Hamennesh (1999), and Sacerdote (2001). 
4 Kessler and Levitt (1999) use Califomia's sentence enhancement laws for a selected group of crimes to 
distinguish between incapacitation and deterrence. See also Levitt (1998). Articles studying responses to 
increases in detection probabilities include Bar-I1an and Sacerdote (2001), on red Iight running violations, 
and McConnick and Tollison (1984), on fouls committed by basketball players. 
3 

numbers of incarcerated criminaIs, which should affect all neighborhood. blocks, not just 
those containing Jewish institutions. Thus, all the effect of police on crime in our paper 
derives from deterrence. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section we describe our 
data, while in section III we discuss our empirical strategy. The empirical results are 
presented in Section IV. Section V concludes. 
11. Data Description 
On July 18, 1994 a terrorist attack destroyed the main Jewish center (A.M.I.A.) in Buenos 
Aires, Argentina. 5 Seven days later, on July 25, the federal governrnent decided to 
provide 24-hour police protection to more than 270 Jewish and Muslim institutions 
(including synagogues, mosques, clubs, cemeteries, and schools) in Argentina. Muslim 
institutions were protected for fear of potential retaliations after the Islamic organization, 
Hezbollah, clairned responsibility for the attack. Nearly ten years after the attack this 
protection is still provided. 
A significant proportion of the protected buildings are Jewish institutions within 
Buenos Aires proper.6 Although providing this surveillance required the distraction of a 
non-negligible proportion of the police forces protecting the areas in which these 
buildings are located, the police forces made a serious effort to maintain previous leveIs 
of police presence in the rest of these neighborhoods. Governrnent officials worried that 
compromising police protection throughout the neighborhoods might generate in the 
residents ill feelings towards the Jewish community.7 Because the personnel commitment 
could not be met with the normal number of police assigned to these neighborhoods, the 
5 This was the second terrorist attack in the city of Buenos Aires. The Israeli embassy had been destroyed 
on March 17, 1992. In the months immediately following this first attack, the most prominent Jewish 
centers, including A.M.LA., had been given more attention by officers on patrol. But surveillance was not 
generalized and dec\ined gradually. Information on these attacks can be found in www.atentado-
amia.com.ar, www.daia.org.ar, and www.bnaibrith.org. 
6 Approximately 85% ofthe Jewish population ofthe country lives in Buenos Aires and its suburbs. 
7 Institutional information for this paper was gathered through a series of interviews with key informants, 
inc\uding the Secretary of Security (third levei of authority in the federal govemment, behind the president 
and ministers), the Chief of the Federal Police, and the Minister of the Interior during the period under 
4 

increased police presence was achieved with officers reassigned from, for example, 
administrative tasks at the Central Police Department, the Communications Division, and 
the Mounted Police.8 
The data analyzed in this paper are from three non-contiguous, Buenos Aires 
neighborhoods that collectively represent about 3.2% of the city's area and account for 
6.9% of its population. One police station is located in each neighborhood.9 The 
neighborhoods were selected on the basis of three criteria: they were the areas with the 
largest numbers of Jewish institutions in the City;IO significant portions of the 
neighborhoods were not close to a protected institution (more than 50% of blocks are 
more than two blocks removed from a protected institution), providing a control group for 
our study; three was the maximum number of police stations for which we were able to 
convince police authorities to provide us data. I I There are a total of 876 blocks in these 
three neighborhoods. The block constitutes the unit of observation for our study. 
We obtained all the information available to the police (with the exception of the 
victim's name) about each auto theft in these neighborhoods for the nine-month period 
starting April 1, 1994 and ending December 31, 1994. Figure 1 presents a timeline ofthe 
events in our study. April 1 to July 17 constitutes the period before the terrorist attack. 
The interim period of July 18 to July 31 includes a first week during which surveillance 
had not yet been introduced and a second week during which police began to implement 
the protection policy. By the end of the last week of July police protection was fully 
functioning and known to the publico Finally, August 1 to December 31 covers the period 
of police protection. 
consideration as weIl as a former federal judge, a former federal prosecutor, and the director of a non-
governrnental organization devoted to protecting civil rights. 
8 For example, more than one third of approximately 200 police officers stationed in Once, one of the 
neighborhoods with the highest density of Jewish institutions, had to be reassigned to protection duties. The 
personnel necessary to maintain the previous levei of police presence in the rest of the neighborhood was 
puIled from outside ofthis police station. 
9 There are 53 police stations in Buenos Aires. Pelacchi (2000) provides an in-depth discussion of the 
institutional features of crime and the police force in Argentina. 
lO There are no Muslim institutions in the neighborhoods considered in our study. 
11 The police stations' daily records, which record auto-thefts on the same pages as reports of every other 
type of crime or incident, are not available to the public. The Chief of the Federal Police had to issue a 
special authorization instructing police station personnel to transcribe the data for uso 
5 

Figure 1: Timeline of Events 
July 
~ 
April 
May 
June 
July 18 
I 
July 25 i 
I 
' 
Aug 
Sept 
Oct 
Nov 
Dec 
'-------~ 
V 
'-------------
---------------~ 
'v""" 
Pre 
Post 
Although victims' tendency to under-report often results in official records 
underestimating crime leveIs, this is a minor problem for car thefts in Buenos Aires for 
two reasons. One, police intervention is required to activate car insurance against theft, a 
type of insurance carried by most car-owners in Buenos Aires (89% according to 
victimization surveys, see Ministerio de Justicia, 2000). Two, because criminaIs often use 
stolen cars in the commission of other crimes, victims who report car thefts to police 
forestalI confusion about their involvement in such crimes. The same victimization study 
cited above reports that 87% of Buenos Aires car thefts are reported to the police, 
compared to only 29% for alI types of crime. A further advantage of auto-theft data is that 
this category of crime is expected to be more sensitive to police presence. 12 Most 
robberies occur after a brief period of surveillance of the intended victim. 13 CriminaIs 
concentrating their attention on mobile victims might miss the presence of police. 
Property (e.g., a parked car), on the other hand, being stationary enables criminaIs to 
gather information on areas in which they intend to commit crimes. 
Car theft information obtained from the police includes the address at which the 
stolen vehicle was parked, make and year of the vehicle, day and time of the report, and 
whether the robbery was violent. During the period of analysis 794 non-armed car thefts 
12 Ninety-four percent of Buenos Aires car robberies occur in the street (Ministerio de Justicia, 2000). 
13 Such criminaIs are said to operate "on the spot" (in Spanish, ai boleo). All information about criminal 
methods was gathered in interviews with key informants. 
6 

were reported in these neighborhoods. 14 Although they norrnally occur in the middle of 
blocks, car thefts in many cases are reported at comers so as to facilitate victims' verbal 
descriptions of crime locations at the time they file police reports. We assigned one 
quarter of each car theft reported at a comer to each of the intersection' s four blocks. 15 
The completed data set included inforrnation on the geography of these 
neighborhoods, in particular, the precise location of each Jewish institution. There are 45 
protected institutions in this part of the city. Thirty-seven of them are within these 
neighborhoods, while the rest are near the boundaries (but less than three blocks away).16 
The geographical distribution of blocks, institutions, and car thefts is summarized in 
Table Ai in the Appendix. 17 
We measure for each block In our sampie the distance to the nearest Jewish 
institution, whether or not the building is within our neighborhoods. We distinguish 
among blocks that contain a Jewish institution, blocks that are one block away from the 
nearest Jewish institution, and blocks that are two blocks away from the nearest Jewish 
institution, and compare these with blocks that are more than two blocks away from the 
nearest Jewish institution. 
Table i presents means (and standard deviations) of auto thefts for each month for 
each type of block. The bottom row tallies the number of blocks of each type. For the 
month of July we consider, separately, the period before and after the terrorist attack. For 
14 We exclude a small number (63) ofarmed robberies reported during this period as well as 86 misreports 
that correspond to non-existing or incomplete addresses or to car thefts that occurred outside of our sample 
neighborhoods (i.e., that were reported to the wrong police station). 
IS This procedure assigns some fractions of thefts to blocks outside the boundaries of the neighborhoods 
under study, which reduces the total number of car thefts from 794 to 778.75. With few exceptions, Buenos 
Aires is a perfect grid city, with streets crossing perpendicularly at comers. Each block is 100 meters (110 
yards) long. Measurement error in the dependent variable tends to overestimate the standard errors of the 
regression coefficients. 
16 None ofthe protected institutions in our sample is located at a comer. 
17 The lowest levei of aggregation for which population census inforrnation is available in Argentine cities is 
census fraetions (fracciones censales), which cover approximately eight to ten contiguous hectares. Using 
the 1991 census, we compare socioeconomic variables potentially related to crime victimization and car 
ownership. Tests ofmeans reveal no statistical differences between census fractions that contain and do not 
contain Jewish institutions along the following dimensions: age and years of education of the household 
head; percentage of women; percentage of households below the poverty line; percentage of overcrowded 
households; and home ownership rate. The only dimension along which these census fractions differed was 
employment rate of the household head: 94.1 and 94.9, respectively, for fractions with and without Jewish 
institutions. We interpret these results as evidence that the surveillance policy was random1y assigned across 
socioeconomic characteristics. 
7 

the post-July period, the table shows that blocks occupied by a Jewish institution 
experienced a lower leveI of car thefts than the control group (i.e., blocks more than two 
blocks away from the nearest Jewish institution). A similar reduction is not observed for 
blocks that are one or two blocks away from the nearest Jewish institution. In particular, 
eomparisons of means indicate that average car theft in blocks with protected institutions 
is significantly less than average car theft for the control group for every month after July, 
with the exception of October. Although casual inspection of the data for blocks that 
contain a Jewish institution also suggests a decline for the first days of July (before the 
attack), the difference with the control group is not statistically significant for this period. 
Indeed, for every period prior to the terrorist attack we cannot reject that the car-theft 
mean for the blocks with Jewish institutions is equal to the mean for the control group. 
Figure 2 plots the same information at a more disaggregated leveI, namely, by 
week. The series are obviously more volatile for the aggregates that average a smaller 
number ofblocks (see the bottom row ofTable 1). The horizontallines represent the pre-
and post-attack average leveIs for each block type. Prior to the attack there are no 
discernible differences in these averages across the different types of blocks. After the 
attack, however, average car thefts for blocks that eontain Jewish institutions evolve 
around a lower mean. A verage leveIs of car thefts for the other types of blocks do not 
seem to change after the attack. 
lU. Empirical Strategy 
Our purpose is to identify the causal effect of poliee presence on car thefts. Using the 
total number of car thefts per block during each month from April to December as the 
dependent variable gives us a panel with nine observations for each block. 18 We exclude 
ear thefts that occurred between July 18 and July 31. 19 Controlling for month and 
individual effects, we obtain the difference-in-differences estimators of the effect of 
police on crime using the following model: 
18 Of course, our monthly leveI of aggregation is arbitrary. We obtain similar results when we aggregate the 
data, for example, at the weekly leveI. Ali results reported but not presented are available upon request. 
19 lncluding the period between July 25 and July 31 does not affect our results. 
8 

where: 
Car Theftit = ao Same Bloek Polieej , + ai One Bloek Polieej , + 
+ a 2Two Bloeks Po/ieej, + M, + Fj + Bit, 
Car Theftit is the number of car thefts in block i for month t; 
Same-Bloek Polieeit is a dummy variable that equals 1 for the months after the 
terrorist attack (August, September, October, November, and December) if there 
is a protected institution in the block, O otherwise; 
One-Bloek Polieeir is a dummy variable that equals 1 after the terrorist attack 
(August, September, October, November, and December) ifthe bIock is one block 
away from the nearest protected institution, O otherwise; 
Two-Bloeks Polieeit is a dummy variable that equaIs 1 after the terrorist attack 
(August, September, October, November, and December) if the block is two 
bIocks away from the nearest protected institution, O otherwise; 
Mr is a month fixed effect; 
Fi is a block fixed effect; 
ê;r is the error term.20 
The empirical exercise exploits three aspects of our data. First, it uses the fact that 
the geographical distribution of police forces induced by the surveillance poIicy is 
exogenous to the distribution of crime. Officers are pIaced in those bIocks to protect a 
potential terrorist target, not in response to leveIs of common crime. Second, the 
avaiIability of data before and after the terrorist attack enables us to include bIock fixed 
effects that controI for time-invariant influences. Finally, having data on blocks with and 
without protected institutions allows us to define a treatment and a control group so that 
we can include time effects that controI for any aggregate shocks in the evolution of crime 
(including any trends over time). 
20 Standard errors are Huber-White (i. e., heteroskedasticity consistent) unless specified. 
9 

lt is worth noting that we estimate the effect of police presence on crime absent 
direct data on the distribution of police forces. In our study the post-attack distribution of 
the protected institutions stands in for the presence of police forces. Indeed, our paper 
could be construed to be an instrumental variables application. If a portion of the police 
force is endogenously allocated to fight common crime, whereas another portion is 
exogenously deployed to protect the Jewish buildings, we could use the surveillance 
policyas an instrument for police presence. A two-stage exercise, however, would require 
detailed data on the distribution of police forces per block at any given time, information 
that is confidential. Although it is possible to calculate the reduced form regression of the 
outcome on the instrument, it is not feasible to estimate the instrumented two-stage 
regression. 
A natural question with respect to our empirical approach is the extent to which 
police officers deployed to protect Jewish and Muslim institutions are effective anti crime 
agents. Although policemen in this role have limited scope for pursuing suspected 
criminaIs outside their assigned areas, they can nevertheless interfere with crimes 
committed near their posts and communicate the presence of suspicious-Iooking 
individuais to policemen patrolling the neighborhood. Moreover, criminais probably 
expect the police to intervene. From a more practical point of view, there is anecdotal 
evidence of arrests made by policemen on duty guarding these institutions.21 
IV. The Effect of Police 00 Crime 
IV.A. Basic Estimates 
Table 2 reports our basic regression results. Colurnn (A) uses only the nearest measure of 
police presence, Same-Block Police, a dummy that takes the value 1 for every month after 
the attack for every block in which there is a Jewish institution. This regression considers 
all the rest of the neighborhoods as our control group. The coefficient on Same-Block 
Police is negative and significant. 
21 See, for example, La Nacion, September 11, 1999, which reports the conviction of a car thief 
apprehended in March 1997 by an officer protecting a Jewish school in Belgrano. Similar events were 
10 

Regression (B) includes a larger measure of distance .to a protected institution, 
One-Block Po/ice. This variable captures the effect of police presence on the six adjacent 
blocks that are one block away from each block occupied by a guarded institution. The 
effect of Same-Block Police is negative, significant, and marginally larger in absolute size 
than the one reported in column (A). The effect of One-Block Po/ice (the effect on 
immediately neighboring blocks) is not significant. It indicates that blocks one block 
removed from a protected institution do not experience significant1y fewer car thefts than 
the rest of the neighborhood. 
Regression (C) includes a third measure of proximity to a guarded institution, 
Two-Blocks Police. This measure takes the value I during the post-attack period for alI 
the blocks that are two blocks away from the nearest Jewish institution. The significance 
of Same-Block Police remains below the 1 % leveI, whereas the coefficients on One-Block 
Po/ice and Two-Blocks Po/ice are not significant. For blocks within the immediate radius 
of the protected institutions (one or two blocks removed) car thefts are not fewer than for 
the non-treatment group (i.e., the rest of the neighborhood).22 We later introduced 
additional treatment dummies (Three-Blocks Police, Four-Blocks Police, and so forth), 
but their coefficients were not significant1y different from zero. 
Our results suggest that the introduction of a fixed and observable police presence 
generated a significant decline in car thefts in the protected blocks but no effect one or 
two blocks away relative to the rest of the neighborhoods. For the rest of the paper we 
focus on this specification, which takes as our control group blocks more than two blocks 
away from the guarded buildings. Our results do not change when we treat one and two 
blocks removed blocks as part of the control group (or if we restrict the control group to 
an even more distant area). 
The effect of police presence in the same block is quite large in economic terms. It 
indicates a reduction of 0.081 car thefts per month in the blocks that received direct 
police protection. The average number of car thefts per month per block from August 
reported in Villa Luro and Once (where a police officer protecting a Jewish institution was stabbed in a 
struggle with a thiefwho was robbing a nearby grocery store; the burglar was later arrested). 
22 Similar results are obtained if we include a set of durnmy variables that measure the distance in blocks to 
the Jewish institutions rather than the block fixed effects. As suggested by Figure 2, none ofthese dummies 
is significant. 
II 

through December for all blocks more than two blocks away from a protected institution 
is 0.108. Relative to this average, car theft declines by 75% in blocks in which a protected 
institution is situated. 
The estimated drop in crime in protected blocks can be approximated into an 
elasticity of crime with respect to police presence. The estimated percentage change in car 
theft is -75%. To calculate the percentage change in police presence, we note, for 
example, that in the Once neighborhood approximately 200 officers were deployed prior 
to the attack. Assuming that Buenos Aires policemen work eight-hour shifts and an 
average of 21 days per month, there are approximately 47 officers on patrol at any given 
time. Inasmuch as Once comprises 153 blocks, the average presence of officers per block 
is 0.31. Roughly approximated, the change in police presence is (1-0.31)/0.31=2.23, for 
an approximate elasticity of car theft with respect to police of -0.33. It might also be 
appropriate to reduce the number of policemen present at any given time by the 
proportion of patrol officers relative to officers performing other duties (e.g., 
adrninistrative or investigative tasks). Bayley suggests 60% as a reasonable number for 
this proportion in the United States (see chapter 2 in Bayley (1998». Using these 
estimates the elasticity of car theft with respect to police is -0.17. 
This number is smaller than the police elasticity of motor vehicle theft reported 
for the United States in previous work (see, for example, Levitt (1997) and McCrary 
(2002». Comparisons with previous studies, however, must allow for the fact that they 
use changes in crime at the city leveI and cannot distinguish between deterrence effects of 
extra police (i.e., reductions in crime stemming from decisions by some criminaIs to 
switch to other activities) and incapacitation effects (i.e., reductions in crime owing to the 
apprehension of criminaIs who subsequently cannot commit crimes while incarcerated). 
The empirical strategy employed in our paper, premised on policemen standing guard, 
suggests that estimated effects are exclusively deterrence effects. The effects of 
incarceration and subsequent reduction of the criminal population should be observed for 
all blocks, not just for those occupied by protected Jewish institutions. 
12 

IV.B. Robustness 
In this section we present further tests to help assess the validity of our results. For 
example, a simple potential objection is that, because the protection policy also imposed 
parking restrictions right in front of some of the protected institutions, the policy might 
have led mechanically to a depressed number of victims. To address this issue, we 
measured the forbidden parking space in front of each institution. This area represents, on 
average, 11 % ofthe total parking space for protected blocks.23 Under a linear relationship 
this factor could explain a 0.012 reduction in the number of car thefts (11 % of 0.108, the 
average number of car thefts for the control group). We reject at the 1 % significance leveI 
that our estimated coefficient equals this value. 
A related issue is that drivers may have preferred to avoid parking near the 
protected institutions for fear of another terrorist attack. To address this concern, in Table 
3 we estimate the evolution of our police coefficients over time after the terrorist attack. 
If fear of another terrorist attack was preventing neighbors from parking in these blocks, 
we should expect the effect to diminish over time.24 Yet, our coefficients on Same-Block 
Po/ice remain constant over the period of analysis. Moreover, both the Israeli embassy 
and the A.M.l.A. terrorist attacks were focused on the target buildings (surrounding 
buildings in the block were not destroyed), so the impact of fear of future attacks should 
be concentrated on parking spaces direct1y in front of the Jewish institutions.25 
Interestingly, Table 3 reports for August, the first month after the attack, a negative and 
significant coefficient on One-Block Police, leading us to speculate that criminaIs needed 
time to realize that the police guards were actually restricted to their posts; subsequent1y, 
the policemen show no effect in deterring crime one block away. 
23 This figure represents an upper Iimit of the parking restrictions generated by the terrorist attack inasmuch 
as parking in front of some of the institutions was already restricted before the attack. 
24 Similarly, it may be argued that after the attack common criminaIs experienced a bloom of civility that led 
them to avoid committing crimes in front of buildings of the Jewish community. Again, we would expect 
such a bloom to fade over time. Reduced crime in New York City immediately after the terrorist attack of 
September lI, 2001 was attributed to a rise in civility (see, for example, "US Crime Rate Up, Ending 
Decade ofDecline," Christian Science Monitor, June 25, 2002). 
25 lt should also be emphasized that finding a legal parking space in these neighborhoods is often difficult, 
thus reducing the incidence of this problem. On the severe parking conditions in Buenos Aires, see, for 
example, La Nacion, March 5, 2001. 
13 

We also investigate whether blocks close to a Jewish institution exhibit a different 
crime dynamic than the rest of the neighborhood in the period before the terrorist attack. 
If crime was diminishing in blocks occupied by Jewish institutions before the attack, 
perhaps we are capturing a spurious correlation. To analyze this issue, we consider a 
sample that starts on April 1 and ends on July 17. We then re-estimate our basic 
regression redefrning our Same-Block Police, One-Block Police, and Two-Blocks Po/ice 
dummy variables to take the value 1 at the end of April (column (A) of Table 4). We do 
this for each month prior to the attack (i.e., end of May in column (B) and end of June in 
column (C)). In this way, we reproduce our exercise as ifthe terrorist attack had occurred 
during the pre-treatment period. The non-significant results in Table 4 validate our 
exercise in the sense that they reveal no special crime dynamics affecting our treatment 
group before the terrorist attack. 
The question of whether the timing of the change in the evolution of car thefts 
around Jewish institutions coincides with the date police protection was deployed can be 
approached as a test for the timing of a structural break in the model presented in Section 
Ill. We estimate a series of models with treatment dummies defined for every possible 
breakdate. We then calculate the sum of squared errors for each mode!. The least squares 
breakdate estimate is the date for which the sum of squared errors associated with the 
model is minimized (Bai, 1994; Bai, 1997; Bai, Lumsdaine and Stock, 1998; Hansen, 
2001). Considering the full sample period (all observations from April 1 to December 31, 
including the July 18 to July 31 ínterim period), we first perform this exerci se redefining 
the treatment dummies to take the value 1 at the end of each month. The sum of squares 
errors is minimized by the regression that considers the end of July to be the breakdate. 
To gain precision, we also perform the exercise at a week1y levei of aggregation. In this 
case, the breakdate estimator corresponds to the end of the fourth week of July. Thus, at 
both frequencies of aggregation the least squares breakdate estimates coincide with the 
actual date police protection was deployed to the Jewish institutions. 
In the presence of positive serial correlation, a potential concern is that OLS 
regressions underestimate standard errors and thereby inflate the significance of the 
results. This problem might be exacerbated in difference-in-differences estimates when 
14 

the treatment is serially correlated, as is the case for the proxy for police presence that we 
use in our exercise. We employ two solutions (discussed in Bertrand, Duflo and 
Mullainathan (2001» to solve this problem for large sample sizes such as ours. First, we 
collapse the data for each block into two observations (pre- and post-periods). In column 
(A) of Table 5, we regress the monthly averages of car thefts per block for the pre- and 
post-attack periods on the treatment variable. The results remain unaltered. The second 
solution is to allow for an arbitrary covariance structure within blocks over time. This is 
presented in column (B) of Table 5, which shows that our results are unaffected when 
standard errors are computed through clustering on blocks?6 
Another concern is the possible presence of spatial correlation across blocks of the 
same neighborhood that could be commonly affected by local shocks. To address this 
issue, in column (C) of Table 5 the standard errors are calculated through clustering on 
neighborhood-month combinations. This does not affect the significance of our results. 
The nurnber of clusters, however, could be considered insufficient when we cluster on the 
27 neighborhood-month combinations. In column (D) we show that the results do not 
change when we consider weekly observations and cluster on the 111 week-neighborhood 
combinations. As another strategy to control for the potential presence of local shocks, in 
colurnn (E) we include neighborhood-month fixed effects rather than our month fixed 
effects. Our results again remain unaltered. 
In colurnn (F) we repeat the analysis, excluding blocks in which no thefts occurred 
throughout the period of analysis. Introducing police protection in these blocks should 
have no effect, the nurnber of car-thefts already being bounded at zero. As expected, the 
coefficient is larger (more negative) when we exclude the 213 no-theft blocks (24% of 
our sample). This coefficient corresponds to a drop in car theft of 89% relative to the 
26 
The variance fonnula for the calculation of the clustered standard errors is given by 
Z = qc(X1Xt'(fUh' Uh)(X1Xt'; where: Uh = LU j ; Gf, G], "', GM are the clusters; M is the 
~ 
~~ 
N-1 M 
number of clusters; U j = (y j - X jb)x j; and qc = ----; while Yj, Xj' b, x, N and k follow 
N-kM-1 
standard econometric notation (for further details, see STATA (2001), page 87). This variance estimator 
coincides with the Huber-White variance estimator when each cluster contains one observation. 
15 

control group. Finally, a Poisson specification presented in colurnn (G) shows our results 
to be robust to estimation using count data models.27 
IV.C. Further Resu/ts 
Using standard information from the used car market we exploit our data on car make and 
year to construct an estimate of the value of the stolen cars. We then analyze, in Table 6, 
the differential deterrent effect ofpolice presence (splitting the sample between cheap and 
expensive cars). We perform similar analyses for weekday and weekend and night and 
day thefts. The Same-Block Po/ice coefficients show no statistically significant 
differences in the effect of police presence on crime by car value, day of the week, or time 
of day (after normalizing the coefficients by the average number ofthefts of each type). 28 
For some of the blocks to which police were assigned post-attack some source of 
crime protection was already in place. In Table 7 we compare the effect of the additional 
police protection for blocks occupied by a bank, public building (including foreign 
embassies), gas station, or any of these buildings relative to other guarded blocks not 
previously provided this security. The first two cases (bank and public building) indicate 
some police protection already in the block. The latter case (gas station) implies 
significant light and movement during the entire day. As expected, the coefficient on 
additional police presence is always smaller in size when previous sources of crime 
protection were already present in the block. The effect of police presence for previously 
protected blocks is significantly different from zero only in blocks that have a bank (see 
Colurnn (A», at which police are present only during office hours and often inside the 
building. 
27 Similar results are obtained using a Negative Binomial modeJ. 
28 For example, the Same-B/ock Po/ice eoeffieient of -0.028 in eolumn (A) eorresponds to a reduetion in 
expensive ear thefts of 71 % (the post-July mean of expensive ear thefts in the eontrol group is 0.039). The 
eoeffieient of -0.042 for eheap ear thefts (eolumn (B» indieates a reduetion of 65% (the post-July mean of 
eheap ear thefts in the eontrol group is 0.065). The differenee is not statistieally signifieant. Note that ear 
model and, thus, value is not available for ali reported ear thefts. 
16 

IVD. Discussion 
The focus of our paper is to estimate the causal effect of police on crime and to explore 
the internaI validity of our estimates. It is also worth discussing briefly the public finance 
question (i.e., whether treatment benefits outweigh costs) and the externaI validity of our 
results (i.e., whether they have predictive value). Although a full evaluation is not 
possible, some of the information that we have available is worth considering. 
A starting point for the cost-benefit analysis is the direct cost of police 
surveillance relative to car values. During this period, a Buenos Aires policeman was 
earning on average a monthly wage of $800. Given that policemen work eight-hour shifts 
and average 21 work days per month, the monthly cost of providing police protection for 
one block is approximately $3,428. Our estimates suggest that police presence in a block 
would induce a reduction of 0.081 of a car theft per month. The average value of the 
stolen cars in our sample is $8,403.29 Thus, in terms of the reduction in auto-theft 
exclusively, the protection policy was not cost-effective. Of course, visible police 
protection provides other social benefits besides a lower rate of car theft, such as 
deterring other types of crime not considered in our study (e.g., burglaries or terrorist 
attacks). lmportantly, incapacitating criminaIs is likely to substantially benefit society, 
whereas our estimates capture only deterrence effects. A fuII analysis, moreover, would 
need to assess the psychological benefits to typical citizens of feelings of greater security 
consequent to observing the presence of police. Crime reduction in the protected blocks, 
however, could simply reflect the displacement of criminal activity to other areas of the 
city. Indeed, we found some evidence consistent with this displacement hypothesis. For a 
number of specifications we detected an increase in car theft two blocks away from 
protected institutions, although this is not a robust finding of our paper.30 
29 If some stolen cars are recovered in working condition, then only a fraction of their value should be 
counted. Official publications put the proportion of cars stolen in Buenos Aires that are never recovered at 
60% (Ministerio de lusticia (2000». One should also count, however, the amount oftime consumed by the 
recovery process and the cost of any needed repairs. 
30 For example, using a binary Logit model that treats equally any positive number of thefts or assigning 
each theft reported at a comer as one theft in each of the four blocks of that intersection. Comish and Clarke 
(1987) and Hesseling (1994) survey the criminology Iiterature on displacement. Ayres and Levitt (1998), 
Lott (1998), and Duggan (200 I) study the effect of introducing unobservable protection devices (Lojack 
and concealed handguns) with potentially positive extemalities. Similarly, in our study, observable police 
presence might induce negative extemalities in neighboring areas. Given the growth in private expenditures 
17 

Another way to evaluate the impact of the policy, relevant for the public finance 
question, is to determine whether total car thefts in Buenos Aires were affected as much 
as or less than the reduction in the blocks that contain protected institutions. 
Unfortunately, reliable monthly data for car thefts citywide in Buenos Aires are 
unavailable. The annual published crime data show a general upward trend in car thefts 
and other property crime during the 1990s in the city of Buenos Aires (that is less 
apparent in the rest of the country). The year 1994 was not an outlier in this processo One 
should also note that these crime increases were concentrated in Iow-income urban areas 
(e.g., Di Tella, Galiani and Schargrodsky, 2002), whereas the neighborhoods considered 
in our study were middle-to-high income areas. Final1y, the protected blocks probably 
represent too small a share of the city, meaning that, given the noise in the official 
statistics and the trends affecting the leveI and the distribution of crime during the period, 
it is unclear whether the impact of our natural experiment can be perceived at the 
aggregate leveI. 
With respect to the externaI validity of our findings, a number of issues are worth 
mentioning. First, the standing-policeman technology we analyze is similar to that used 
for private security in the most affluent neighborhoods of Buenos Aires. In these areas 
booths for private security guards are placed at each comer approximately 100 meters 
from one another.
31 If privately provided surveillance covers all parts of the block (i.e., 
there are no blind spots) and there are no advantages to having a section of the block 
protected by two security guards (i.e., overlapping protection), then the maximum 
protection distance is about 50 meters, the distance from the security guard's booth to the 
house furthest from his surveillance. Interestingly, our results are consistent with the 
coverage solution reached by the private security market. 
Second, our results involving a technology based on policemen in a fixed location 
might be relevant in the analysis of other forms of police presence such as officers on 
to reduce crime, and the fact that this spending often involves observable crime deterrence activities (such 
as the use of private armed security), the distributional impact of crime across income leveis is worth 
studying. 
31 Note that guards are deployed mainly to protect the houses in the block against burglaries and that 
breaking into a house is more visible than breaking into a car and probably can be seen from a greater 
distance. The value of the protected property in these rich areas is higher than in the neighborhoods 
considered in our study. 
18 

patro!. Switching to mobile policemen is unlikely to induce a different response in car 
theft given that the act of breaking into a car is of extremely short duration. Because 
criminaIs check that there are no policemen watching when they start the process, the 
likelihood of discovery conditional on no monitoring at the start of the break-in is 
virtually zero. Our key informants have emphasized in interviews that it is well 
understood in police circles that the probability of a policeman on patrol actually 
witnessing a crime being committed is quite low. The most likely case is that someone 
who has witnessed a crime calls the police.32 Furthermore, the kind of police presence we 
analyze is visible. An altemative, to deploy police agents in plain clothes, would make 
breaking into a car more risky for criminals.33 Such benefits, however, might be offset by 
the dissatisfaction of cÍtizens who value knowing that they are under police protection. 
Another potential cost is that it could make reporting crimes to nearby police more 
difficult for victims and by-standers. Interestingly, policy-makers' tendency to address 
public pressure for more protection from crime by deploying more visible police on the 
streets could imply counter-productive police reallocations.34 Given the highly local 
impact of street deployments, it would be interesting to obtain estimates of the effect of 
extra policemen on investigative tasks. 
32 A recent article in The Economist (February 24, 2001) makes a similar point: ''Sut putting more police on 
the beat will probably not have much impact on crime figures. A single patrolling officer typicaIly covers an 
ar