NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
DOES COMPETITION AMONG PUBLIC
SCHOOLS BENEFIT STUDENTS AND TAXPAYERS?
A COMMENT ON HOXBY (2000)
Jesse Rothstein
Working Paper 11215
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11215
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2005
I thank Orley Ashenfelter, David Card, Tom Davidoff, Olivier Deschenes, Hank Farber, Alan Krueger, Steve
Levitt, Robert McMillan, Cecilia Rouse, Lori Taylor, Miguel Urquiola, Jacob Vigdor, Diane Whitmore, three
anonymous referees, and seminar participants at Berkeley, Princeton, and the Southern Economics
Association meetings for helpful discussions. Anna Huang provided excellent research assistance. I am
grateful to the National Center for Education Statistics for access to confidential data and to Caroline Hoxby
for generously making available her data and program code. I also gratefully acknowledge financial support
from the Princeton Industrial Relations Section and the National Science Foundation. Any errors, opinions,
findings, conclusions, or recommendations are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
NSF or NCES. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research. 
 © 2005 by Jesse Rothstein.  All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Does Competition Among Public Schools Benefit Students and Taxpayers? A Comment on Hoxby
(2000)
Jesse Rothstein
NBER Working Paper No. 11215
March 2005
JEL No. H7, I2, R5
ABSTRACT
In an influential paper, Hoxby (2000) studies the relationship between the degree of so-called
"Tiebout choice" among local school districts within a metropolitan area and average test scores. She
argues that choice is endogenous to school quality, and instruments with the number of larger and
smaller streams. She finds a large positive effect of choice on test scores, which she interprets as
evidence that school choice induces greater school productivity. This paper revisits Hoxby's analysis.
I document several important errors in Hoxby's data and code. I also demonstrate that the estimated
choice effect is extremely sensitive to the way that "larger streams" are coded. When Hoxby's hand
count of larger streams is replaced with any of several alternative, easily replicable measures, there
is no significant difference between IV and OLS, each of which indicates a choice effect near zero.
There is thus little evidence that schools respond to Tiebout competition by raising productivity.
Jesse Rothstein
Industrial Relations Section
A-17-J1 Firestone Library
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
jrothst@princeton.edu

 
1
Does Competition Among Public Schools Benefit Students and Taxpayers?   
A Comment on Hoxby (2000) 
 
I. Introduction 
School choice policies promise to align the incentives of school administrators with the 
demands of parents, and may therefore lead to more efficient educational production (Friedman, 
1962; Brennan and Buchanan, 1980; Chubb and Moe, 1990).  Absent a large-scale school voucher 
program in the United States, however, this prediction has been difficult to test.  Several authors 
(e.g. Borland and Howsen, 1992; Belfield and Levin, 2002) have suggested studying the effects of 
“Tiebout choice,” the use of the residential location decision to select among local monopoly 
education providers.  The idea here is that fragmented governance induces competition among 
school districts analogous to that which would occur among schools with non-residential choice.   
In an influential paper, Hoxby (2000) points out that current governance structures are 
potentially endogenous to school productivity, and proposes that variation in topography, which 
may have influenced optimal jurisdiction size before modern transportation technologies, provides a 
source of exogenous variation.  She estimates instrumental variables regressions of individual test 
scores and school spending on a metropolitan-level Tiebout choice index, defined as one minus a 
Herfindahl concentration index with districts’ enrollments as their “market shares,” using as 
excluded instruments the number of larger and smaller streams in the area.  She reports substantial 
positive effects of district fragmentation on student test scores and negative effects on spending.   
This comment presents a reanalysis of Hoxby’s test score results, which form the core of her 
empirical analysis.  These results turn out to be quite sensitive to plausible alterations to Hoxby’s 
specification.  In particular, the large, significant effect of choice on achievement obtains only with 
Hoxby’s particular streams variables.  When I substitute alternative and arguably better constructions 
of the same variables, I obtain smaller estimates that are never significant.  There is also some 

 
2
evidence of sample selection bias, deriving from Hoxby’s decision to exclude private school students 
from the analysis.  I conclude that Hoxby’s positive estimated effect of interdistrict competition on 
student achievement is not robust, and that a fair reading of the evidence does not support claims of 
a large or significant effect.  Similarly, I find little compelling evidence of endogeneity of the choice 
index to school quality, suggesting that the more precise OLS estimate of zero choice effect on test 
scores should be preferred to less precise IV estimates.  The evidence that competition among 
schools will improve academic outcomes is thus substantially weaker than it might have appeared. 
Section II focuses on replication.  Despite several requests, Hoxby has not provided the 
precise data set from which her published results were derived.  She has, however, made available a 
corrected data set (Hoxby, 2004a).  The new data generate results that deviate in important ways 
from those that were published.  In particular, the first stage coefficients, and even basic summary 
statistics for the streams variables, are substantially different.  Moreover, there appear to be errors 
remaining in Hoxby’s data and computer programs, causing some students to be assigned to the 
wrong metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs) and some others to be randomly assigned to districts 
and MSAs.  When I correct these errors, I obtain somewhat weaker results.  In what I consider the 
best replication sample, Hoxby’s specification and instruments indicate an insignificant or marginally 
significant effect of choice (i.e., district fragmentation) on student achievement.  
In Section III, I consider the sensitivity of the results to the particular instrumental variables 
used.  Hoxby’s discussion does not make clear precisely how her larger and smaller streams counts 
are defined.  In particular, though Hoxby writes that the source of her smaller streams variable 
provides “the longitude and latitude of [each stream’s] origin and destination” (2000, p. 1222), she 
actually uses only streams’ destinations to assign them to MSAs.  A stream that flows through an 
MSA but ends elsewhere is not included in the MSA’s count.  I present results using an alternate 
variable that counts all streams flowing through each MSA, regardless of where they end.  I also 

 
3
demonstrate that Hoxby’s larger streams variable is key to the results, and that it plays a substantially 
different role in the first stage to the individual-level IV model than in the MSA-level model that 
Hoxby presents as “the implied first-stage regression” (2000, p. 1224-5).1  The choice coefficient 
shrinks by 45 to 85% and ceases to be significant when the larger streams variable is excluded.  I 
obtain similarly small and insignificant coefficients when I substitute alternative larger streams 
counts that, unlike Hoxby’s subjectively coded variable, are readily replicable using public-use data.   
Finally, Section IV explores the implications of Hoxby’s exclusion of private school students 
from her sample.  Hoxby documents a negative relationship between the Tiebout choice index and 
the metropolitan private enrollment rate.  This may produce selection bias in specifications, like 
Hoxby’s, that are estimated only on public sector students (Hsieh and Urquiola, 2003).  Estimates 
from samples that include both public and private school students are free of this potential sample 
selection bias, and are notably smaller than those from public-sector samples.  None are significantly 
different from zero, even with Hoxby’s instruments. 
II. Replication 
Table 1 presents IV estimates of the district fragmentation effect on each of two test scores, 
using Hoxby’s streams variables as instruments.2  The first column reproduces the estimates from 
Hoxby’s Tables 3 and 4.  Hoxby’s preferred specification is that for 12th grade reading scores in 
Panel A, although I analyze 8th grade scores as well (in Panel B) because the sample sizes are so 
much larger.3  Hoxby assumes that the student-level error term is composed of three homoskedastic 
                                                 
1 The IV model could be estimated at the MSA level as well, as both the endogenous variable (choice) and instruments 
(streams) vary only across MSAs.  Hoxby (2000, p. 1219) claims that her specification “is most efficiently estimated at 
the individual level.”  I follow this decision throughout, though I present MSA-level estimates in the appendix. 
2 The student test score data are drawn from the National Educational Longitudinal Study (NELS).  Details of the data 
set construction, along with summary statistics, control variable coefficients, and alternative specifications, are in an 
appendix available from the author.   
3 I prefer the 8th grade sample, as its design is much more straightforward than in later waves.  Students were randomly 
sampled from within their schools in the 8th grade, then followed across schools in successive waves.  As a result, the 
follow-up samples are not representative of the schools their students attend, nor of their districts or metropolitan areas, 
though they remain nationally representative.  Also, as with any panel data, sample attrition is a potential problem in later 
survey waves. 

 
4
components, one common to all students in the same metropolitan area, another common within 
the district, and the last specific to the student.  She computes standard errors using an FGLS 
estimator, due to Moulton (1986), that accounts for the implied student-level serial correlation.  The 
estimated choice effect is positive and significant in each panel. 
An earlier version of this comment discussed several alternative algorithms for assigning 
students in the NELS data to school districts and metropolitan areas (MSAs), as Hoxby’s (2000) 
discussion did not specify her approach.  In response to that draft, Hoxby re-evaluated her 
assignment algorithm and discovered some errors (Hoxby, 2004c).  She has made available, via the 
National Center for Education Statistics (NCES), a corrected data set that uses a new crosswalk.4  
Column 2 reports estimates from the Hoxby/NCES data, which provide substantially smaller 
samples than were used in the published results.  Hoxby’s computer program, also provided (Hoxby, 
2004b), does not compute the “Moulton” standard errors that were used in the published paper, but 
instead uses Stata’s “cluster” option to generate standard errors which are consistent in the presence 
of arbitrary heteroskedasticity and within-MSA serial correlation.  I have implemented the Moulton 
estimator, and I report both Moulton and clustered standard errors for each specification in Table 
1.5  Estimates from Hoxby’s corrected data (hereafter, the “Hoxby/NCES” data) have somewhat 
larger standard errors than did those in the published paper, and the 12th grade coefficient ceases to 
be significant (at the 5% level) when clustered standard errors are used. 
In examining the Hoxby/NCES data and code, I have found several remaining glitches.  
First, some errors remain in the new district-MSA crosswalk:  Several Ohio school districts are 
                                                 
4 The corrected data set and the programs used to construct it are available from NCES to researchers who are licensed 
for access to the restricted-use NELS data.  
5 Hoxby writes that “Robust [clustered] standard errors are larger than standard errors calculated using the Moulton 
method” (Hoxby 2004b).  Both estimators are consistent (with asymptotics in the number of MSAs) under the error 
components model, and there is no model in which the Moulton estimator is consistent but the cluster estimator is not.  
A difference between the two estimators may indicate that the error components assumption is incorrect; in that case, 
cluster is consistent but the Moulton estimator is not.  Further discussion of the two estimators, and of my 
implementation of the Moulton estimator, is in the appendix. 

 
5
assigned to the Raleigh-Durham MSA; several additional districts have incorrect, invalid or obsolete 
MSA codes; and over one quarter of metropolitan districts are missing MSA codes.  Second, though 
the clear intent is to use all three waves of the NELS survey to assign students to districts, due to an 
apparent coding error information about students’ second- and third-wave schools is ignored.6   
Finally, students with missing school IDs from the first wave of the NELS survey—the 
sample was freshened in later waves—are randomly assigned to schools that entered the survey in 
later waves.  This occurs because Hoxby’s program fails to exclude observations with missing IDs 
when merging the student and school files.  Stata’s sort algorithm breaks ties randomly when, as 
here, a unique sort order is not specified.  Stata’s merge procedure then assigns the first observation 
with a missing ID from the “master” data set to the first similar observation from the “using” data 
set, the second to the second, and so on.  Because ties among students and schools with missing IDs 
are broken differently every time the sort command is run, each execution of Hoxby’s program 
produces a different data set, and different estimated choice effects.7  To gauge the severity of this 
unintended stochasticity, I executed Hoxby’s data construction program 10,000 times, tabulating the 
estimated choice effect from each resulting data set.  The histogram is available as Appendix Figure 
A1.  The mean choice effect for 12th grade scores is 5.39, quite close to the 5.30 computed from the 
Hoxby/NCES data.  The standard deviation across iterations (0.47) is not particularly large, but the 
range is quite wide:  I obtained estimates as small as 2.17 and as large as 8.15.   
After discovering these anomalies, I re-wrote Hoxby’s data assembly program, fixing errors 
in the district-MSA crosswalk and taking care to correctly match students, schools, districts, and 
                                                 
6 Hoxby merges the NELS student file to the NELS school file three times in succession, using school ID variables from 
each of the three survey waves.  By the second merge, all variables from the school file exist on the student file.  Without 
specific instruction (which is not provided), the merge command in Stata does not overwrite variables that already exist 
on the “master” file, so nothing on the student file is altered by the second and third merges. 
7 Hoxby’s program also fails to account for Stata’s tie-breaking procedure when creating the MSA-level data set used for 
her first stage model, and her program thus assigns the Raleigh MSA to the East North Central division (which contains 
Ohio; see above) 36% of the times it is executed; the Hoxby/NCES data set is one such draw from the distribution. 

 
6
metropolitan areas.  I attempted to follow Hoxby’s algorithm as closely as possible.8  I did not at this 
point attempt to reproduce the “larger streams” variable, but simply relied on the MSA-level count 
that Hoxby provided and discarded MSAs that were excluded from her tabulation.9  Results are 
presented in column 3 of Table 1.  Sample sizes are somewhat larger—correctly assigning districts 
that were previously classified as non-metropolitan more than offsets the loss of students who are 
reclassified to an MSA with a missing larger streams value—and approach those seen in Hoxby’s 
Table 4.  Coefficients resemble those found in the Hoxby/NCES data, somewhat smaller for 12th 
grade scores and somewhat larger for 8th grade scores, with similar patterns of significance. 
Column 4 represents a somewhat more expansive interpretation of replication.  I retain 
Hoxby’s specification, but I follow my own judgment in sample and covariate construction rather 
than directly following her algorithm.  Where Hoxby assigns each student to a single district for all 
three waves even if the student moved between waves, for this sample I use only contemporaneous 
information to construct distinct assignments for each wave.  There are also minor differences in 
variable definitions.10  Choice effect estimates are smaller with this sample.  For 12th grade scores, 
the choice effect is insignificant regardless of the standard error computation; for 8th grade scores, it 
is insignificant with the random effects standard errors but significant when the errors are clustered.   
                                                 
8 There were some ambiguities.  In particular, each student has nine potential district codes, as each student may have a 
school code in each of three waves and each school may have different district codes in each wave.  Hoxby attempts to 
assign a single district code for each student, to be used with data from all three waves, but the aforementioned coding 
errors mean that only the three district codes from the first-wave school are considered.  It is not clear how she would 
resolve discrepancies among the larger set.  I assign each student to a separate district for each wave, using only 
contemporaneous information from the student and school files, then use Hoxby’s majority rule algorithm to select 
among the three resulting assignments. 
9 Hoxby uses 1990 MSA definitions.  Puzzlingly, she does not provide counts of larger streams for all of the MSAs 
included in these definitions, but does provide counts for some obsolete MSA codes—from the 1983 or 1981 MSA 
definitions—that appear in her faulty crosswalk.  For example, 19 larger streams are reported for MSA number 3755, 
which corresponded to the Kansas City, KS PMSA in 1983 but was included in the Kansas City MO-KS MSA (number 
3760) in 1990; there is also an entry of 37 larger streams in MSA 3760.  It is not clear what algorithm might have 
produced this redundancy, nor whether the latter count includes the streams attributed to the former. 
10 The largest difference is in what Hoxby calls the “mean of log(income) of metropolitan area” variable.  She uses an 
arithmetic weighted average of the log of each district’s mean income; I use instead the log of the MSA mean income.  
There are also minor differences in the Gini coefficient and the racial composition variables.  Finally, I compute the 
choice index over 8th grade enrollment, where Hoxby uses total enrollment, reasoning that parents cannot be said to 
choose between overlapping elementary and secondary districts (Urquiola, 1999).  Further details are in the appendix. 

 
7
Panel A of Table 2 reports mean values of the streams variables.  Column 1 is from Hoxby’s 
Table 2, while columns 2 and 3 are computed from the Hoxby/NCES data set and from my 
replication sample, respectively.  There are substantial differences between columns 1 and 2.  For 
some reason, the mean of the larger streams variable is more than five times larger than that 
reported in the published paper, while the average MSA has only two thirds as many total—larger 
plus smaller—streams as is indicated by Hoxby’s (2000) Table 2.   
Both the streams variables and the potentially endogenous choice measure vary only at the 
MSA level.  Though Hoxby’s IV estimates are computed at the student level, Hoxby reports only an 
MSA-level “implied first-stage regression.”  I reproduce this specification in Panel B, with the 
published estimates in column 1, those from the Hoxby/NCES data in Column 2, and those from 
the replication samples in 3 and 4.11  All of the replication estimates are substantially different from 
those in the published paper.  Comparing the Hoxby/NCES estimates to the published results, the 
larger streams coefficient has fallen by more than 80% and is no longer remotely significant, while 
the smaller streams coefficient has tripled.  Though both of these findings are somewhat attenuated 
in the replication data sets, they remain worrisome:  The logic of the argument for Hoxby’s 
instruments is that streams once represented impediments to travel, and one would expect this to be 
far more true for larger than for smaller streams, particularly when the threshold for being a “larger” 
stream is set low enough to include over 40 streams from the average MSA (rather than the 8 
indicated in the published paper).   
As noted above, the MSA-level estimates are not the actual first stages for the individual-
level models in Table 1.  The actual first stages are reported in Panel C (for the 12th grade samples) 
and D (for the 8th grade samples).  The streams coefficients are dramatically different:  Larger 
                                                 
11 The replication data sample sizes are somewhat smaller, as several invalid MSA codes that were on the Common Core 
of Data file from which Hoxby took her district-MSA assignments are no longer present and some newly added MSA 
codes must be excluded for lack of the larger streams variable. 

 
8
streams are now negatively related to choice in five of the six samples, once significantly and once 
nearly so.12  Again, this is difficult to reconcile with the story behind the identification strategy.   
III. Counting Streams 
There are several reasons to worry about the validity of Hoxby’s larger streams variable:  It 
derives from Hoxby’s subjective count from printed maps—she describes counting streams “of a 
certain width on the map,” (2000, p. 1222), but does not elaborate; it is missing for several MSAs 
that were inadvertently excluded from Hoxby’s sample;13 and, as Hoxby writes, “one has more a 
priori confidence in the exogeneity of the smaller streams variable because smaller streams are too 
small to affect modern life,” (2000, p. 1230).  Given the evident differences between the larger 
streams variable described in the published paper and the one included in the Hoxby/NCES data, it 
is unclear whether the discussion in Hoxby’s text even applies to the latter variable.   
These concerns cannot be addressed by using the smaller streams variable as the sole 
instrument, however.  Hoxby uses the U.S. Geologic Survey’s Geographic Names Information 
System (GNIS) to count total streams, and defines smaller streams as the number of total streams 
less the count of larger streams.  As a result, any errors in the larger streams variable appear as errors 
of the opposite sign in the smaller streams count.  To avoid reliance on Hoxby’s larger streams 
count, I present estimates that use the total streams count—which can be produced using Hoxby’s 
code from the public-use GNIS data set—as the single instrument.   
                                                 
12 The divergence between the MSA-level results in Panel B and the individual-level results in Panels C and D appears to 
derive from differences in the set of MSAs included.  Hoxby’s first stage estimates and those that I report in Panel B 
include all MSAs, regardless of whether they contain NELS sample students.  When I restrict the sample to those in the 
NELS data (Appendix Table D5), coefficients are similar to those in Panels C and D.  Efficiency can be improved with 
two-sample IV, using the full sample of MSAs to estimate the first stage.  In the Hoxby/NCES data, this yields choice 
coefficients of 3.68 for 8th grade scores and 2.14 for 12th grade scores, both substantially shrunken from the estimates in 
Table 1 and neither significant (Appendix Table D6). 
13 One indication that there may be problems with Hoxby’s larger streams count is that when I correct Hoxby’s code to 
correctly assign total streams to MSAs—her incorrect district-MSA crosswalk is used here as well—there are several 
MSAs with fewer total streams than larger streams.  Hoxby writes that the hand counts were “checked against” the 
GNIS data (2000, p. 1222), but appears not to have caught all discrepancies.  Though I argue below that Hoxby 
systematically undercounts total streams, my correction of this problem reduces but does not eliminate the discrepancies. 

 
9
I also explore an alternative specification for the “total streams” variable.  Despite her 
reference to GNIS variables describing the longitude and latitude of streams’ origins and 
destinations, Hoxby’s code uses only a variable indicating the county where a stream’s destination 
(mouth) is located to assign streams to MSAs.  To illustrate the consequences of this, the Mississippi 
River is attributed only to the non-metropolitan Plaquemines Parish, Louisiana, and not to any of 
the eight metropolitan areas along its banks.14  There is little reason to think that a stream’s 
destination is the key to either its past effects on travel costs or to its current effects on district 
structure.  The USGS distributes an alternative version of the GNIS data that codes each county 
through which each stream flows, from origin to destination.  Using this data file, I construct a 
“total streams” measure that counts toward an MSA’s total any stream flowing through it.15   
Finally, I explore alternative classifications of streams into “larger” and “smaller” groups.  
First, following Hoxby (1994b), I compute separate counts of inter-county and intra-county streams 
and enter them as separate instruments.  I also categorize streams based on their lengths, computed 
as the distance between their sources and mouths, following Hoxby (2000) in requiring a larger 
stream to exceed 3.5 miles.  Each is a crude measure for the variation of interest, but it is difficult to 
see how either might be endogenous; as a result, either should provide consistent IV estimates of the 
choice effect.16  These estimates provide a check on the robustness of the earlier estimates, and have 
the virtue of being easily replicable using the public-use GNIS data. 
                                                 
14 This is not documented in the published paper.  It does not automatically mean that inland cities lack streams, as a 
smaller stream’s mouth might be located where it feeds into a larger river.  Note that the Mississippi may be included in 
the larger streams counts for the relevant MSA’s, though it is not counted toward the total streams.  This appears to 
account for some but not all of the negative smaller streams counts discussed in footnote 13.  
15 In most of the country, MSAs are composed of whole counties.  In New England, however, towns are the basic unit, 
and some counties are split among several MSAs.  Hoxby assigns all of each county’s streams to the MSA containing the 
plurality of its population.  When I reproduce her stream mouths variable, I follow her all-or-nothing rule; my total 
streams count instead assigns streams fractionally to MSAs in proportion to the MSAs’ shares of the county population.   
16 Measurement error in instruments, so long as it is uncorrelated with the endogenous variable, reduces the precision of 
IV estimates but does not affect consistency as long as the measures are sufficiently reliable to avoid so-called “weak 
instruments” problems.  As I show below, the first stages are quite strong. 

 
10
Table 3 presents instrument means (Panel A) and first-stage estimates (Panels B-D, using the 
close replication sample) for several instrument sets.  As before, the first stage is computed at both 
the MSA and individual levels; corresponding estimates using my alternative sample and covariate 
definitions are similar and are reported in the appendix.  For a benchmark, Column 1 reproduces the 
estimate from Column 3 of Table 2, using Hoxby’s streams variables.  Column 2 uses only total 
streams (by Hoxby’s definition, counting only stream mouths), which have positive coefficients at 
both the MSA and individual levels.  Columns 3 and 4 repeat these specifications, using the count of 
all streams flowing through each MSA in place of the count of stream mouths.  This change has 
little effect on the estimates, with the negative larger streams coefficient still evident in the 
individual-level model.  Columns 5 and 6 use alternative definitions for “larger” streams, first as 
inter-county streams and second as streams exceeding 3.5 miles in length.  Using either definition 
and in both the MSA and individual samples, the larger streams variable accounts for the full effect 
of streams on choice, a result that is consistent with the idea that the role of streams derives from 
their importance as natural barriers to travel. 
For each set of instruments, Table 4 reports IV estimates of the choice effect on 12th and 8th 
grade reading scores, Moulton and clustered standard errors, and p-values for tests of the exogeneity 
of the choice variable (using the cluster estimator).17  I also report OLS estimates, each of which 
indicates a negligible choice effect. 
The choice effects are consistently positive and exogeneity of the choice variable is 
consistently rejected when Hoxby’s larger streams count is included as an instrument.  Neither of 
these results holds in any of the specifications that exclude Hoxby’s larger streams variable, however.  
This is partly because the latter estimates are less precise, but this is not the whole story:  The 
                                                 
17 I obtain similar results with Moulton standard errors or when I use the preferred replication sample and covariates.  

 
11
coefficient estimates are also uniformly smaller, generally less than half as large, when Hoxby’s larger 
streams variable is excluded. 
Taking the estimates in Table 4 together, it is clear that Hoxby’s conclusions depend 
critically on her count of larger streams.  I attempted my own count for several MSAs that 
contribute most to the large choice effect estimates, using the same 1/24,000 quadrangle maps that 
Hoxby reported using.  It quickly became apparent that counting streams involves many subjective 
judgments.18  Hoxby describes larger streams as those that “were at least 3.5 miles long and of a 
certain width on the map” (2000, p. 1222), but does not specify what constitutes “a certain width” 
nor where in a stream’s course the width is to be measured.  I began with Fort Lauderdale, which 
may be a particularly difficult case as much of the MSA is swampland and much of the remainder 
was recovered from swampland by a system of man-made canals.  (Even today, airboat trails are 
more common through much of the MSA than is dry land; it seems unlikely to have been settled by 
people who viewed water as an obstacle to travel.)  I decided not to count canals which ran perfectly 
straight, generally exactly West to East, but I did count canals which took irregular paths, reasoning 
that the latter were more likely to correspond to pre-existing rivers.  I also counted branches of 
streams as separate from their parents when they had distinct names (such as the North and South 
Forks of the Middle River), and counted the intracoastal waterway, which separates the easternmost 
portion of the Florida coast from the mainland, as a stream for its similar effect on the ease of travel.  
Where Hoxby reports 5 larger streams in Fort Lauderdale, I counted 12, and a research assistant—
working independently—counted 15.  
I had a similarly difficult experience with other MSAs, finding that many rivers divide and 
recombine multiple times, become wider and narrower, and are interrupted by man-made structures 
                                                 
18 I worked without reference to Hoxby’s counts, to prevent being influenced by these.  Hoxby’s text is confusing about 
whether linear bodies of water other than streams are included in her count.  Her footnote 24 seems to suggest that they 
are not, but her footnote 16 indicates that she counts “inlets, lakes, ponds, marshes, and swamps” “if they are roughly 
curvilinear in form” (emphasis in original).  I followed the latter rule. 

 
12
throughout their courses.  My counts were correlated with Hoxby’s, but generally not identical.  The 
exercise makes clear that Hoxby’s larger streams variable is subjective and unverifiable without a list 
of the particular rivers coded as large.  In the absence of such a list, which Hoxby has not provided, 
no two researchers would come up with identical counts.  As I have only counted streams for a few 
MSAs, however, I cannot be certain of the sensitivity of Hoxby’s results to the differences that 
would inevitably arise.   
IV. Private Enrollment and Selection Bias 
I have concerned myself thus far with replication of Hoxby’s primary specification, and with 
its robustness to plausible alternative decisions about sample and variable construction.  In this 
section, I turn to another issue:  Hoxby’s specification may not provide consistent estimates of the 
effect of interest, that of choice on public school productivity, because her sample excludes private 
school students.  In her Table 6, she documents that choice has a significant negative effect on the 
metropolitan private enrollment share.19  As a result, Hoxby’s specification may be subject to 
selection bias even with valid instruments (Hsieh and Urquiola, 2003).  The reasoning is simple:  
Suppose that the distribution of student test scores is identical across MSAs when both public and 
private school students are included, but that MSAs vary in private enrollment patterns.  In 
particular, suppose that some relatively high-scoring students would choose private schools in a low-
choice market but would remain in the public sector when Tiebout choice is sufficient to provide 
public schools with desired characteristics (Rothstein, 2004).  Then the average test score among 
public school students will tend to be higher in high-choice markets purely as a result of differential 
sample selection.   
                                                 
19 Using both of her streams instruments in a district-level regression, Hoxby (2000, Table 6) estimates that a one-unit 
increase in choice leads to a 4.2% (s.e. 1.2%) reduction in private enrollment.  Hoxby’s SDDB data set double-counts 
students in areas served by separate elementary and secondary districts.  When I instead estimate the relationship at the 
MSA level, I estimate a choice effect of -4.8% (s.e. 2.4%), though this result is somewhat sensitive to the sample and 
covariate construction. 

 
13
Any resulting bias is present in both OLS and IV estimates, though its sign and magnitude 
depend on whether the marginal private school student is positively or negatively selected.  If the 
average score is higher among students drawn into the public sector by expansions of choice than 
among inframarginal public school students, estimates from public school students are 
(asymptotically) upward-biased; if the average score is lower among marginal students than among 
the inframarginal, these estimates are downward-biased.20  Hoxby seems to make the former claim 
when she discusses the consequences of “families with a strong taste for education leav[ing] the 
public sector by shifting their children into private schools” (2000, p. 1233). 
As the NELS survey includes both public and private school students, this potential bias can 
be easily avoided by simply including both groups in the sample. 21  The only hurdle is that the CCD 
cannot be used to assign private schools to school districts and MSAs.  As an alternative, I use 
NELS variables characterizing the demographic composition of the school’s zip code to uniquely 
assign the vast majority of schools to zip codes, and via these to MSAs. 22  As many zip codes span 
school districts, I cannot use this strategy to assign school districts, and I therefore must exclude 
district-level covariates from the specification.23   
Panel A of Table 5 reports estimates from public school students who have been matched to 
MSAs via their schools’ zip codes, using both the “close” and “preferred” covariate definitions.  
                                                 
20 NELS private school students score nearly half a standard deviation higher on the 8th grade reading test than do public 
school students.  This is not particularly informative, however, as the students whose sectoral decision is sensitive to 
Tiebout choice are likely atypical of the inframarginal private school population.  
21 Under fairly strong assumptions—including that private schools are not systematically better or worse than public 
schools; that competition has similar effects on the productivity of public and private schools; and that any peer effects 
are linear and additive, so that stratification does not have an independent effect on average scores— an unbiased 
estimate of the choice effect on average school productivity can be obtained by estimating Hoxby’s specification on a 
pooled sample of public and private school students (Hsieh and Urquiola, 2003).  Hoxby (1994a) uses exactly this 
strategy to test for selection bias from private school enrollment.   
22 In the rare cases where a zip code spans multiple MSAs, I assign each student attending school in that zip code to each 
MSA, with weights proportional to the fraction of the zip code population in each MSA. 
23 Hoxby (2000, Section 7) argues at great length that the inclusion of district-level variables improves the precision but 
does not affect the coefficients on MSA-level variables as long as MSA-level means are included in the specification.  
Strictly, this is only true in the limit, as it relies on the assumption that the district-level variables aggregate exactly within 
the sample to the MSA-level means.  In small samples this is not likely to hold, and the choice coefficient is somewhat 
smaller (more negative) when district-level covariates are excluded from Hoxby’s specification (Appendix Table D3). 

 
14
Estimates are substantially smaller than those presented earlier, with the divergence due more to the 
different methods of assigning MSAs than to the exclusion of district-level covariates. 24  Panel B 
adds the private school students to the sample.  The choice effect estimates fall notably farther here, 
and t-statistics are uniformly less than one. 
I read the estimates in Table 5 as suggesting, but not conclusively demonstrating, that the 
students drawn into the public sector by expansions of choice are somewhat positively selected.25  
While much of the difference from earlier estimates appears to derive from sensitivity of the results 
to the exclusion of district-level covariates and to the method by which schools are assigned to 
MSAs, point estimates do fall even farther when private school students are added to the sample.   
V. Discussion 
Hoxby’s analysis has been very influential, providing what many (e.g. Howell and Peterson, 
2002; Maranto, 2001; Bast and Walberg, 2004) have seen as some of the most compelling extant 
evidence in favor of the proposition that school choice will lead to improvements in the efficiency 
of educational production.  Unfortunately, Hoxby’s key results do not seem to be robust to small, 
reasonable alterations to the sample or to the instrumental variables used.  Interested readers are 
invited to explore alternative specifications beyond those considered here; code to construct both of 
my replication samples and to perform all analyses is available from my web page, as are all data 
components that I am at liberty to distribute. 
As I document above, there are several problems with the Hoxby/NCES data set.  When 
these are remedied, I estimate somewhat weaker effects of choice on student performance than 
                                                 
24 The declines are largest in the close replication sample, as my zip code matching algorithm, which uses only the 
contemporaneous school, is more similar to that used in the preferred sample.  Students in the close replication sample 
who were assigned to MSAs based on their 8th or 10th grade school’s district code in Panel B are assigned using the 12th 
grade school’s zip code in Panel C. 
25 As an alternative test for selection bias, I have estimated a version of Hoxby’s specification (using only public school 
students) that includes a control for an inverse Mill’s ratio computed from the MSA private enrollment rate, in the spirit 
of normal-distribution selection corrections (Gronau, 1974; Heckman, 1979; Card and Payne, 2002).  Estimates of the 
selectivity parameter were extremely imprecisely estimated, and the selection correction had little effect on the estimated 
choice coefficients. 

 
15
those that Hoxby reports.26  When I consider slight adjustments to her specification of the streams 
variables—such as replacing them with plausible, replicable alternative measures—or when I alter 
the sample to avoid potential selection bias from private enrollment, the significant effect of Tiebout 
competition on student scores is greatly attenuated and not statistically distinguishable from zero.  In 
my specification including private school students, using my preferred sample, and instrumenting 
with inter- and intra-county streams (Table 5, Panel B, Column 6), I estimate that a one standard 
deviation increase in choice raises test scores by just under 0.05 standard deviations, with a standard 
error somewhat larger than that.  This compares unfavorably to, for example, the 0.22 standard 
deviations that Krueger (1999) estimates as the effect of reducing elementary school class sizes from 
22 to 15 students in the Tennessee STAR experiment.   
I do not find support, in any of the alternative specifications that I consider, for Hoxby’s 
claim that “naïve estimates (like OLS) that do not account for the endogeneity of school districts are 
biased toward finding no effects” (2000, p. 1236), nor for her conclusion that “Tiebout choice raises 
productivity by simultaneously raising achievement and lowering spending” (p. 1236-7).  Any 
relationship between choice and student test scores is too imprecisely estimated to be robustly 
distinguishable from zero.  Hoxby’s results for the effect of district fragmentation on school 
spending, which I examine in the appendix, are only slightly more robust.27 
There are only a few hundred metropolitan areas in the United States, and this is evidently 
too few to precisely estimate any relationship that may exist between jurisdictional fragmentation 
and either student performance or school spending.  One cannot reject large effects of competition, 
but neither is there strong evidence against a hypothesis of zero effect.  It would be premature to 
                                                 
26 The current analysis has not considered Hoxby’s analysis of the NLSY, which echoes her NELS analysis in indicating 
a salutary effect of interdistrict competition on attainment.  Hoxby seems to find her NELS estimates the most 
compelling, however, and focuses her discussion on these.   
27  Hoxby (2000, Table 5) reports a choice effect on the log of per pupil spending of -0.076 (Moulton standard error 
0.034).  The Hoxby/NCES data yield an estimate of -0.074 (0.141); IV estimates in the replication samples similarly fail 
to reject zero, although OLS estimates are significantly negative.   

 
16
conclude that schools respond to Tiebout competition by raising productivity, nor to use such a 
conclusion as justification for policies that expand non-residential forms of school choice. 
References 
 
Bast, Joseph L. and Walberg, Herbert J. "Can Parents Choose the Best Schools for Their 
Children?" Economics of Education Review, August 2004, 23(4), pp. 431-40. 
Belfield, Clive R. and Levin, Henry M. "The Effects of Competition between Schools on 
Educational Outcomes: A Review for the United States." Review of Educational Research, 
Summer 2002, 72(2), pp. 279-341. 
Borland, Melvin V. and Howsen, Roy M. "Student Academic Achievement and the Degree of 
Market Concentration in Education." Economics of Education Review, March 1992, 11(1), pp. 
31-39. 
Brennan, Geoffrey and Buchanan, James. The Power to Tax: Analytical Foundation of a Fiscal 
Constitution. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1980. 
Card, David and Payne, A. Abigail. "School Finance Reform, the Distribution of School 
Spending, and the Distribution of SAT Scores." Journal of Public Economics, 2002, 83(1), pp. 
49-82. 
Chubb, John and Moe, Terry M. Politics, Markets, and America's Schools. Washington, D.C.: The 
Brookings Institution, 1990. 
Friedman, Milton. Capitalism and Freedom. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1962. 
Gronau, Reuben. "Wage Comparisons--a Selectivity Bias." The Journal of Political Economy, Nov. - 
Dec. 1974, 82(6), pp. 1119-43. 
Heckman, James J. "Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error." Econometrica, 1979, 47, pp. 
153-61. 
Howell, William G. and Peterson, Peter E. "Impact of School Voucher Research." Ps-Political 
Science & Politics, December 2002, 35(4), pp. 659-60. 
Hoxby, Caroline M. "Do Private Schools Provide Competition for Public Schools?" National 
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper #4978, December 1994a. 
____. "Does Competition among Public Schools Benefit Students and Taxpayers?" National Bureau 
of Economic Research Working Paper 4979, December 1994b. 
____. "Does Competition among Public Schools Benefit Students and Taxpayers?" American 
Economic Review, December 2000, 90(5), pp. 1209-38. 
____. "District-Level and Metropolitan-Area Variables Merged with NELS Data." CD, National 
Center for Education Statistics, September 2, 2004a. 
____. "Documentation to 'District-Level and Metropolitan-Area Variables Merged with NELS 
Data':  Construct.Do." National Center for Education Statistics, September 2, 2004b. 
____. "Documentation to 'District-Level and Metropolitan-Area Variables Merged with NELS 
Data':  Runregressions.Do." National Center for Education Statistics, September 2, 2004c. 
Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Urquiola, Miguel. "When Schools Compete, How Do They Compete?  
An Assessment of Chile's Nationwide School Voucher Program." Mimeo, Columbia 
University, August 2003. 
Krueger, Alan B. "Experimental Estimates of Education Production Functions." Quarterly Journal of 
Economics, May 1999, 114(2), pp. 497-532. 
Maranto, Robert. "Finishing Touches." Education Next, Winter 2001, 2001(4), pp. 20-25. 

 
17
Moulton, Brent R. "Random Group Effects and the Precision of Regression Estimates." Journal of 
Econometrics, August 1986, 32(3), pp. 385-97. 
Rothstein, Jesse M. "Good Principals or Good Peers?  Parental Valuation of School 
Characteristics, Tiebout Equilibrium, and the Incentive Effects of Competition among 
Jurisdictions." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper #10666, August 
2004. 
Urquiola, Miguel. "Demand Matters: School District Concentration, Composition, and 
Educational Expenditure." University of California, Berkeley, Center for Labor Economics 
Working Paper #14, April 1999. 
 

Published
Hoxby/ 
NCES data
Close 
replication 
sample
Preferred 
sample and 
covariates
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Panel A:  12th grade reading scores
# of students
6,119
5,475
5,934
6,688
# of MSAs
209
184
194
199
Choice index coefficient
5.77
5.30
4.74
3.29
  S.E. (Moulton)
(2.21)
(2.36)
(1.98)
(1.83)
  S.E. (Cluster)
(2.94)
(2.42)
(2.56)
P-values, exogeneity test (clustered)
0.02
0.02
0.20
Panel B:  8th grade reading scores
# of students
10,790
10,175
10,429
11,719
# of MSAs
211
185
186
184
Choice index coefficient
3.82
4.45
5.93
2.93
  S.E. (Moulton)
(1.59)
(1.87)
(2.10)
(1.58)
  S.E. (Cluster)
(1.99)
(2.32)
(1.40)
P-values, exogeneity test (clustered)
0.00
0.00
0.00
Table 1:  IV estimates of choice effect on NELS 8th and 12th grade reading scores in several 
samples, Hoxby specification
Notes:  See Hoxby (2000) and data appendix for description of data, samples, and covariates.  Column 1 is from Hoxby 
(2000), Table 4.  Standard error estimators and exogeneity tests are described in the appendix.  Following Hoxby, all 
analyses use NELS sampling weights, adjusted to sum to one within each MSA (though this does not hold exactly in 
Column 2; see appendix for details).  Bold S.E.s indicate that with that S.E., the coefficient is significant at the 5% level.

Published
Hoxby/ 
NCES data
Close 
replication 
sample
Preferred sample 
and covariates
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Panel A:  MSA-level sample means
Larger streams
8
44
45
Smaller streams
183
84
80
Panel B:  MSA-level first stage estimates
Larger streams (100s)
0.080
0.012
0.040
0.043
(0.040)
(0.021)
(0.021)
(0.021)
Smaller streams (100s)
0.034
0.096
0.093
0.091
(0.007)
(0.019)
(0.018)
(0.018)
N
316
310
304
304
F statistic (instruments)
24.4
14.8
16.2
16.3
Panel C:  Individual-level first stage estimates (12th grade reading sample)
Larger streams (100s)
nr
-0.043
-0.024
0.015
(0.023)
(0.020)
(0.020)
Smaller streams (100s)
nr
0.133
0.133
0.114
(0.021)
(0.017)
(0.018)
N
nr
5,475
5,934
6,688
F statistic (instruments)
nr
20.5
31.3
28.4
Panel D:  Individual-