NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PEOPLE, PLACES AND PUBLIC POLICY:
SOME SIMPLE WELFARE ECONOMICS OF LOCAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS
Patrick Kline
Enrico Moretti
Working Paper 19659
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19659
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2013
We thank Alan Auerbach, Tim Bresnahan, Rebecca Diamond, Juan Carlos Suarez Serrato, Reed Walker,
Danny Yagan, and Owen Zidar for helpful comments. Attila Lindner provided outstanding  research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Patrick Kline and Enrico Moretti. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

People, Places and Public Policy: Some Simple Welfare Economics of Local Economic
Development Programs
Patrick Kline and Enrico Moretti
NBER Working Paper No. 19659
November 2013
JEL No. H1,H2,H3,H4,H7,J0,R0
ABSTRACT
Most countries exhibit large and persistent geographical differences in wages, income and unemployment
rates. A growing class of "place based" policies attempt to address these differences through public
investments and subsidies that target disadvantaged neighborhoods, cities or regions. Place based policies
have the potential to profoundly affect the location of economic activity, along with the wages, employment,
and industry mix of communities. These programs are widespread in the U.S. and throughout the world,
but have only recently been studied closely by economists. We consider the following questions: Who
benefits from place based interventions? Do the national benefits outweigh the costs? What sorts of
interventions are most likely to be effective?To study these questions, we develop a simple spatial
equilibrium model designed to characterize the welfare effects of place based policies on the local
and the national economy. Using this model, we critically evaluate the economic rationales for place
based policies and assess the latest evidence on their effects. We conclude with some lessons for policy
and directions for future research.
Patrick Kline
Department of Economics
UC, Berkeley
508-1 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
pkline@econ.berkeley.edu
Enrico Moretti
University of California, Berkeley
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
moretti@econ.berkeley.edu

1
Introduction
Economists have long been fascinated by the vast international diﬀerences in economic
development that characterize the modern world. Yet even within the wealthiest countries,
income and living conditions vary tremendously across regions, cities, and neighborhoods.
For example, in 2009 the average hourly wage of a worker in Stamford, CT was twice that
of a worker with the same education in Jacksonville, NC (Moretti, 2011). Within-country
heterogeneity in unemployment rates can be even more pronounced. For example, the 2009
unemployment rate in Flint, MI was almost six times higher than the corresponding rate
in Iowa City, IA (Kline and Moretti, 2013). These geographical diﬀerences in labor market
outcomes are persistent across decades (Blanchard and Katz, 1992; Barro and Sala-i-Martin,
1992) and, strikingly, even across generations (Chetty et al., 2013).
As Robert Lucas (1988) famously remarked about international diﬀerences in economic
development “I do not see how one can look at ﬁgures like these without seeing them as
representing possibilities.” Many governments, it seems, share this perspective, as spatially
targeted development programs are quite common. Speciﬁcally, many countries have in-
stituted “place based” economic development policies aimed at fostering economic growth
in lagging regions and reducing the extent of spatial inequality within their borders. Such
programs have become an important form of government intervention with the potential to
profoundly aﬀect the location of economic activity, along with the wages, employment, and
industry mix of communities and regions.
Place based policies raise a number of interesting questions: Who beneﬁts from place
based interventions?
Do the national beneﬁts outweigh the costs?
What sorts of inter-
ventions are most likely to be eﬀective? To study these questions, this paper develops a
simple theoretical framework that clariﬁes the eﬀect of place based programs on the welfare
of residents in the target locality and the rest of the nation. We use this model to critically
evaluate the economic rationales for place based development policies and to assess the latest
empirical evidence on their eﬀects. We do not aspire to provide a comprehensive survey of
all the papers in the literature, nor a comprehensive taxonomy of all place based policies.1
Our discussion focuses on the interplay between theory and evidence and the need for future
policy relevant research integrating the two.
What are Place Based Policies? Most government programs have the goal of provid-
ing income or services to particular groups of individuals. Welfare programs, for instance,
transfer resources from taxpayers to a population of eligible low income households. Such
programs can be said to be “person based” in that government treatment of entities depends
1Bartik (1991, 2002), Papke (1993, 1994), Glaeser (2001), and Glaeser and Gottleib (2008) provide in
depth discussions of the institutional details and economics of the major U.S. place based policies of the
20th century.
1

upon their individual (or household) characteristics such as income or employment status.
Place based policies, by contrast, explicitly target geographic areas for some form of special
treatment, be it tax subsidies, public investments, or special rules and regulations.
Attempts to target resources towards particular areas or regions date back to antiquity
– it is well known for example that taxes were used to subsidize the citizens of Rome at the
expense of the rest of the Empire (Rostovtzeﬀ, 1929). However it is only more recently that
national governments have sought to encourage economic development in lagging regions,
cities, or neighborhoods with explicit place based development programs.
The 20th century saw the birth of several large scale programs targeting underdeveloped
regions and neighborhoods. A prominent example in the U.S. is the Tennessee Valley Au-
thority, an ambitious federal program conceived as part of the New Deal that consisted of
massive public infrastructure investments in roads and electricity designed to modernize a
region which, at the time, was one of most underdeveloped in the country.
More recently, initiatives subsidizing declining cities and neighborhoods have grown pop-
ular. One of the most heavily studied are state “Enterprise Zones.” These programs origi-
nated in the U.K. during the Thatcher administration as a way of revitalizing declining urban
industrial neighborhoods through tax abatements and reductions in regulation (Rubin and
Richards, 1992). Shortly afterwards, many U.S. states adopted similar programs oﬀering
investment and wage subsidies for ﬁrms locating within Zone boundaries. California, for
instance, has 42 Enterprise Zones, covering most major cities in the state along with a few
rural areas. Similar neighborhood level programs are operated by the federal government.
The “Empowerment Zone” and “Renewal Community” programs, for example, oﬀer subsi-
dies to ﬁrms with the goal of revitalizing distressed neighborhoods. Federal neighborhood
based programs have expanded over time: by 2003 more than 60 urban communities had
federal zones of some sort (see GAO (2004) for details).
Although lack of a systematic national database makes it diﬃcult to know exactly how
much is spent annually on spatially targeted economic development programs across all lev-
els of government, the sums are clearly substantial, particularly when state programs are
included.
The U.S. federal government spends at least $15 billion per year on spatially
targeted development activities (GAO, 2012). In addition, state and local governments are
estimated to spend $80 billion per year on incentives designed to attract outside investment
and to reshape the location of activity within their jurisdiction (Story, 2012; Story, Fehr, and
Watkins, 2012). This $95 billion in total expenditures amounts to roughly three times the
outlays for Unemployment Insurance in a typical non-recession year (CBO, 2013) or, equiv-
alently, three times the outlays for the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families program
(Oﬃce of Family Assistance, 2013).
In a country where industrial policy and government attempts to “pick winners” are
usually frowned upon, location-based incentives have become a popular de facto industrial
policy, embraced with equal enthusiasm by blue and red state governors and mayors. Indeed,
it is rare for employers to open large new facilities in the United States today without
2

receiving some type of subsidy on the part of state and local governments.
Table 1 shows data from Story, Fehr, and Watkins (2012) on the accounting value of
subsidies provided by state and local governments in a typical year, by state. The top three
states are Texas ($19.1 billion per year), Michigan ($6.65 billion per year) and Pennsylvania
($4.84 billion per year).2 Recent examples include: $102 million in state incentives to Pana-
sonic in 2011 to move its North American headquarters to Newark, along with an additional
$4 million in tax breaks from the city; $307 million to Ford from the state of Kentucky in
2007 and 2008 in exchange for keeping its two plants in Louisville and expanding them; and
$232 million to Samsung in 2011 from the state of Texas to locate its latest wafer fabrication
facility in Austin (Bruns, 2006).
Place based policies are arguably even more prevalent in Europe. The European Union
Regional Development Fund, for example, uses taxpayer money to fund generous business
subsidies and public investments in regions with low nominal income and high unemploy-
ment. For the period 2007-2013, the fund amounts to 49 billion Euros per year (European
Commission, 2013), or roughly four times the total amount spent by the U.S. federal gov-
ernment.3
National governments in Europe have also eagerly embraced these policies. Since the
1970’s, the main business support scheme in the U.K. – the Regional Selective Assistance
– has provided discretionary grants to ﬁrms in disadvantaged regions, deﬁned as regions
with low levels of per capita GDP and high unemployment (Crisculo et al. 2012). Italy has
long provided regional transfers that single out “distressed” regions, especially in the South,
for special infrastructure investments and, more recently, for hiring incentives and other
labor market subsidies (See for example Deidda et al, 2012). Sweden, France and Germany
have similar programs (Marx, 2001). Interestingly, while the European Union legislation
generally prohibits state aid, it makes explicit exceptions for place based policies that target
“deprived” regions.4
2Common examples of state incentives include direct subsidies and/or tax incentives, subsidized loans,
hiring subsidies, industrial parks, technology transfer programs, export assistance and export ﬁnancing,
the provision of infrastructure, workforce training, subsidies to higher education and area marketing. This
spending is often undertaken in cooperation between state and local governments. In most cases, the state
government provides the bulk of the subsidies for plant location deals. See Story, Fehr, and Watkins (2012),
Greenstone and Moretti (2004) and issues of Site Selection Magazine for additional examples. Some of the
state programs have as their stated goal the support of industries, not locations. However in most cases
these programs are also implicitly targeting locations because industries tend to be geographically clustered.
For example, California spends $191 million on subsidies to the ﬁlm industry. While the program does not
explicitly single out a speciﬁc location, the bulk of the money is obviously intended to beneﬁt the movie
industry in Los Angeles.
3The stated goals of the Fund are (i) to promote economic convergence across EU regions; (ii) to increase
regional competitiveness and employment; and (iii) to foster “territorial cooperation” (European Commis-
sion, 2013).
4In particular, Article 87 of the Treaty of Amsterdam allows for state aid to promote the economic devel-
opment of areas where the standard of living is abnormally low or where there is serious underemployment
3

Place based development policies are also popular in Asia. A well known example is the
Chinese system of Special Economic Zones, which provide strengthened property rights and
incentivize foreign direct investment in selected areas (Wang, 2013). Other examples include
programs adopted by the governments of Japan, Korea and Taiwan to subsidize investment
in computers, semi-conductors and biotechnology (Deloitte, 2012).
What is the Economic Rationale for Spatial Targeting? While place based de-
velopment policies are pervasive, their economic rationales are often misunderstood. Many
such programs list job creation for local residents as a primary objective. Following suit,
a large academic literature seeks to estimate the local employment eﬀects of such policies,
usually with the goal of computing the number of jobs created per dollar spent. While this
is perhaps useful for assessing whether program objectives were met, such exercises do not
speak directly to the welfare consequences of these policies.
As with any government intervention, there are two broad normative criteria – equity
and eﬃciency – that may justify place based policies. Equity rationales are popular among
policymakers: by subsidizing disadvantaged areas, governments hope to help the disadvan-
taged residents of those areas. In the face of large and persistent diﬀerences in labor market
outcomes across cities and regions, such arguments often resonate with the public.
However, economists have traditionally been skeptical of equity based arguments, as lo-
cation is being used to serve a fundamentally person based motive: subsidizing poor house-
holds.5 Such a goal could be achieved more directly by making the tax system more progres-
sive or strengthening means tested transfer programs. Furthermore, spatial targeting might
bring with it a number of unintended consequences owing to worker and ﬁrm mobility.
Indeed, standard spatial equilibrium models predict that in a world where workers are per-
fectly mobile and housing supply is completely inelastic, the entire beneﬁt of location-based
subsidies will be capitalized into land rents. In such a scenario, location-based programs in-
tended to help poor communities will have limited eﬀect on the wellbeing of local residents,
simply amounting to a transfer of wealth to landowners in the targeted areas. If workers are
less mobile, place based redistributive policies can aﬀect the utility of inframarginal workers.
But in the absence of perfect residential segregation by income, targeting transfers based
upon income or demographic characteristics remains a more direct, and potentially more
eﬃcient, way to help those in need.
Most place based programs also have an eﬃciency rationale stemming from attempts to
remedy important localized market failures. For instance, the Tennessee Valley Authority
funded a series of large investments in transportation infrastructure that substantially raised
(Crisculo et al. 2012).
5Glaeser and Gottleib (2008) exemplify this view, concluding that “the rationale for spending federal
dollars to try to encourage less advantaged people to stay in economically weak places is itself extremely
weak.”
4

regional productivity and would be diﬃcult for the private sector to provide on its own.
Likewise, the U.K. system of Enterprise Zones was originally intended to oﬀset the regulatory
and tax burdens associated with urban development (Rubin and Richards, 1992). There are
(at least) ﬁve broad sorts of market imperfections that can potentially justify place based
development policies:
1. Public Goods: Public amenities (e.g. public safety) and productive public goods
(e.g. roads) are likely to be under-provided by the private sector.
2. Agglomeration Economies: Spatial proximity among ﬁrms and workers may gen-
erate productivity spillovers. Likewise, proximity among consumers may aﬀect the
supply (or quality) of local amenities.
3. Labor Market Frictions / Rigidities: Labor market institutions and bargaining
behavior may lead the unemployment rate in a community to be too high.
4. Missing Insurance / Credit Constraints: Residents cannot insure themselves
against local shocks which may prevent them from smoothing consumption.
5. Pre-Existing Distortions: Many government interventions that are ostensibly per-
son based (e.g. income taxation, the minimum wage) generate spatially biased distor-
tions.
To the extent that these market failures are localized, spatially targeted government
intervention has the potential to improve eﬃciency. For example, if attracting new ﬁrms
to an area tends to generate productivity spillovers that beneﬁt incumbent ﬁrms (e.g. as
in Greenstone, Hornbeck and Moretti, 2009) then subsidies for new ﬁrms can in principle
raise welfare by internalizing the productive externality. However, local policies aimed at
addressing these market imperfections may have unintended consequences of their own. For
example, it is possible that subsidizing agglomeration economies in a region diverts resources
from other areas, leading to a net loss in aggregate productivity. Thus, equity-eﬃciency
tradeoﬀs typically remain when local market imperfections are present, albeit in a somewhat
modiﬁed form.
The next section introduces a simple spatial equilibrium model that formally illustrates
the key factors governing the incidence and eﬃciency of place based policies with complete
markets.
Our discussion emphasizes the twin roles of worker heterogeneity and housing
supply in generating, and altering the distribution of, consumer and producer surplus in
the economy. Then, in Section 3, we consider in detail how the equity-eﬃciency tradeoﬀ
is altered by each of our broad classes of market imperfections. Section 4 concludes with
lessons for policy.
5

2
Welfare Eﬀects of Place-Based Policies When Mar-
kets are Complete
In this section we develop a simple spatial equilibrium framework that is useful for un-
derstanding the eﬀects of place based policies on national and local welfare in the absence of
market imperfections. This model illustrates the essential equity-eﬃciency tradeoﬀs gener-
ated by spatial targeting in the presence of worker mobility. In Section 3 we study how our
conclusions change when imperfections of various sorts are added.
In our model, the place based policy provides a subsidy to ﬁrms in the targeted city.
Speciﬁcally, we focus on the case of subsidies to the ﬁrm’s wage bill – a common policy
employed, for example, by many state Enterprise Zones.
Our qualitative results can be
shown to extend to other subsidies designed to raise local labor demand, including subsidies
to the private cost of capital.6 In Section 3, we also consider “amenity-building” investments
predicated on eﬃcient production of local public goods.
In all cases, we are interested in understanding the policy’s equilibrium eﬀects in the
presence of worker and ﬁrm mobility. As we shall see, our conclusions are governed in large
part by the degree of worker mobility and the elasticity of housing supply. We conclude
this section by discussing the empirical evidence on the eﬀects of two prominent place based
policies and the links to our welfare theoretic framework.
2.1
Assumptions
We work with a two city example to illustrate the basic issues involved with the minimum
level of notational complexity. Workers can move and are free to reside and work in either
city a or city b.7 There is a continuum of workers of measure one, each of whom inelastically
supplies a unit of labor and rents a unit of housing.8
Because leisure and housing are
demanded inelastically, we employ a simple linear speciﬁcation for utility. Workers’ indirect
utility in a location depends on nominal wages, the cost of housing, taxes, and local amenities.
Speciﬁcally, the indirect utility of worker i in city c is:
Uic
=
wc −rc + Ac −t + eic
(1)
=
vc + eic
(2)
6To the extent that capital is an imperfect substitute for labor, such policies will ultimately result in
increases in labor demand in the targeted area, just like wage subsidies. Of course, the impact on labor
demand will be quantitatively smaller per dollar spent than in the case of direct subsidies to the wage bill.
7For simplicity, we assume these areas are distinct labor markets, meaning that workers cannot live in one
market and work in another. See Busso, Gregory, and Kline (2013) for a neighborhood model incorporating
multiple locations, commuting, and extensive margin labor supply decisions.
8The assumptions that workers supply a ﬁxed amount of labor and consume a ﬁxed amount of housing
are not crucial, but greatly simplify the analysis.
6

where wc is the nominal wage in city c, rc is the cost of housing, Ac is a measure of lo-
cal amenities, and t is a lump sum tax. The term eic represents worker i’s idiosyncratic
preferences for location c and is assumed to have mean zero across workers.
Thus, utility in location c is the sum of two components: a systematic component,
vc ≡wc −rc + Ac −t, shared by all workers residing in that location, which measures
the average worker valuation of the community; and an idiosyncratic component eic that is
diﬀerent for each worker and reﬂects individual speciﬁc preferences for that location over and
above any real wage and amenity diﬀerences. A larger eic means that worker i is particularly
attached to city c holding constant real wages and amenities. For example, having family in
city c may make it more attractive.
For analytical convenience, we further assume that the eic are independently and identi-
cally distributed according to a type I Extreme Value distribution with scale parameter s and
mean zero.9 This in turn implies the diﬀerence in idiosyncratic preferences for community a
and b is distributed across workers according to a Logistic distribution:
(eia −eib)/s ∼Logistic(0, 1).
(3)
The parameter s governs the strength of idiosyncratic preferences for location and therefore
the degree of labor mobility.
If s is large, many workers will require large real wage or
amenity diﬀerences to be compelled to move. On the other hand, if s is small, most workers
are not particularly attached to one community and will be willing to move in response to
small diﬀerences in real wages or amenities. In the extreme case where s = 0 there are
no idiosyncratic preferences for location and workers will arbitrage any diﬀerences in the
systematic component of utility.
Firms in each city produce a single good Y using labor and a local amenity. We assume
that Y is a traded good sold on international markets at price one. Production is Cobb-
Douglas with constant returns to scale:
Yc = XcN α
c K1−α
c
,
(4)
where Xc is a city-speciﬁc productivity shifter, Nc is the fraction of workers in community
c, and Kc is the local capital stock. We assume capital markets are globally integrated so
that ﬁrms in each city can rent as much capital as desired at ﬁxed price ρ.
To study the eﬀects of a subsidy designed to increase demand for labor in a city, we assume
that the government provides an ad valorem wage credit τc to employers in community c.10
The subsidy is ﬁnanced by lump sum taxes on all workers independent of their location so
that the following balanced budget condition holds:11
waτaNa + wbτbNb = t.
(5)
9None of the substantive results here hinge on the Extreme Value assumption. See Kline (2010) and
Busso, Gregory, and Kline (2013) for analyses with a nonparametric distribution of tastes.
10This is a realistic feature of many place based policies. For example Empowerment Zones provide an
annual wage subsidy to qualiﬁed workers who live and work in the zone.
11Because labor supply is ﬁxed, no labor-leisure distortion would emerge even with ad valorem income
7

Firms equate the marginal revenue product of labor to wages net of taxes:
wc(1 −τc) = α yc
Nc
.
(6)
which, after plugging in the ﬁrst order condition for capital ρ = (1 −α) Yc
Kc and rearranging,
yields the (inverse) labor demand function in city c:
ln wc = C + ln Xc
α
−1 −α
α
ln ρ −ln(1 −τc),
(7)
where C ≡ln α + 1−α
α ln(1 −α) is a constant.
As this representation makes clear, the inverse labor demand schedule is horizontal in
wage-employment space. This results from our assumptions that production exhibits con-
stant returns to scale and that capital is elastically provided at price ρ. As a result, wage
variation across cities stems entirely from variation in productivity levels.12 A corollary of
this result is that ﬁrms face zero proﬁts and cannot bear the incidence of local subsidies or
taxes (see Suarez Serrato and Zidar, 2013 for a spatial equilibrium model where ﬁrms can
bear some of this incidence in the form of product market rents).
Housing is supplied competitively at marginal cost which, because land is ﬁxed, is in-
creasing in the number of units produced. We assume that this gives rise to the following
constant elasticity inverse supply function:
rc = zcN kc
c
(8)
where the number of housing units in city c is assumed to be equal to the number of workers
Nc. The parameter kc governs the elasticity of housing supply. We assume that this pa-
rameter is exogenously determined by geography and local land regulations. In cities where
geography and regulations make it easy to build new housing, kc is small (Saiz, 2008). In
the extreme case where there are no constraints to building new houses, the supply curve is
horizontal, and kc is zero.
In our framework, workers and landowners are separate agents. While in reality most
workers own their residence, this is not always true in urban areas where the poor reside.
Keeping workers separate from landowners has the advantage of allowing us to separately
identify the welfare consequences of changes in housing values from the welfare consequences
of changes in labor income.13 This is important both for conceptual clarity and for thinking
about the diﬀerent implications of the results for labor and housing policies.
taxes. However charging an income tax based upon nominal incomes would introduce complications along
the lines discussed by Albouy (2009).
12This result can be relaxed in many ways. For example, it is natural to expect ﬁrms to use land in the
production process, which would lead labor demand to be downward sloping again.
13Also, housing wealth tends to be concentrated among the wealthy, making increases in housing prices
regressive.
8

Landlord proﬁts are given by the area above the inverse supply curve, which can be
written:
Πc
≡
Z Nc
0
(rc −zcxkc)dx =
kc
kc + 1rcNc.
(9)
Note that these proﬁts, which are the only form of producer surplus in this model, depend
negatively on the housing supply elasticity kc. In the extreme case where kc approaches
zero, landlord proﬁts disappear. This follows from the fact that when housing is supplied at
constant marginal cost, average costs equal price.
2.2
Equilibrium
Workers are free to live in the city that maximizes their utility. A worker chooses city a
if and only if eib −eia < va −vb. Given (3), the fraction Na of workers who will locate in city
a can be written
Na = Λ
va −vb
s

,
(10)
where Λ(.) ≡
exp(.)
1+exp(.) is the standard Logistic CDF. The fraction (and hence number) of
workers in community a is increasing in the real wage gap (wa −ra) −(wb −rb) between
city a and b and in the gap Aa −Ab in amenities between the cities. The elasticity of city
size with respect to city speciﬁc components of utility depends on the distribution of worker
preferences for location. Speciﬁcally, one can show that:
d ln(Na)
d ln(va −vb) = Nb
s (va −vb)
(11)
If idiosyncratic preferences for location are not very important (s is small), then workers are
very sensitive to diﬀerences in mean utility between cities. In the limiting case of perfect
mobility (s = 0), any diﬀerence in real wages not oﬀset by a corresponding diﬀerence in
amenities results in the entire population of workers choosing the city with the higher mean
utility. By contrast, as s approaches inﬁnity, workers become insensitive to prices and are
eﬀectively immobile.
The equilibrium of our model is easy to characterize. From equation (10) we have that
the marginal worker’s relative preference for city b over city a needs to equal the diﬀerence
in real wages net of amenities:
sΛ−1(Na) = (wa −wb) −(ra −rb) + (Aa −Ab).
(12)
Workers whose relative preference for city b is greater than the diﬀerence in real wages
net of amenities locate in b, while those whose relative preference for city b is less than the
diﬀerence in real wages net of amenities locate in a. To see the role played by the model’s
fundamentals in determining city size and the identity of the marginal worker, we can use
equations (7) and (8) to re-write this expression as :
9

sΛ−1 (Na)
|
{z
}
Diﬀerence in Tastes
=
eC
ρ
1−α
α
 
X
1
α
a
1 −τa
−X
1
α
b
1 −τb
!
|
{z
}
Wage Diﬀerence
−(zaN ka
a −zb (1 −Na)kb)
|
{z
}
Rent Diﬀerence
+
Aa −Ab
|
{z
}
Amenity Diﬀerence
.
The left hand side of this expression gives the quantiles of workers’ relative preferences
(eib −eia) for city b as a function of Na. We can think of this function as deﬁning a supply
curve to city a. This is graphically represented by the upward sloping blue curve in Figure
1. The height of this curve gives the idiosyncratic preference for city b relative to city a of a
marginal worker. Moving to the right, the curve increases as the stock of workers with low
distaste for city a is depleted leading the tastes of the marginal worker to change.
The right hand side of this expression gives the diﬀerence in mean utilities between the
two communities. We can think of this as deﬁning a relative demand curve for residence in
city a versus city b, with the height of the curve giving the mean willingness to pay to move
from city b to city a given local prices. This is shown graphically by the downward sloping
green curve in Figure 1. The willingness to pay to live in a is decreasing in Na because city
a becomes relatively more expensive as it grows.
Equilibrium occurs when these two curves cross. Figure 1 shows the case where the two
cities are initially identical in terms of productivity, amenities, and housing supply, so that
half of the workers live in city a and the other half in city b.14
In this equilibrium, there is a single marginal worker (at point N ∗
a) who is indiﬀerent
between city a and city b. All other workers are inframarginal and enjoy a positive consumer
surplus associated with choosing the city they strictly prefer. The magnitude of consumer
surplus depends on the strength of idiosyncratic preferences for location, which in turn
depends on s. This is easy to see in the Figure. The blue shaded area between the blue
line and the equilibrium value of sΛ−1 (N ∗
a) (which in this example is zero) measures the
consumer surplus accruing to workers. The area to the left of N ∗
a gives the surplus accruing
to workers who are inframarginal with respect to community a while the area to the right of
N ∗
a gives the surplus accruing to workers who are inframarginal with respect to community
b.
The magnitude of surplus is increasing in the scale s of taste heterogeneity which governs
the curvature of the blue line. In the extreme case when workers are completely homogeneous
in their preferences – so that s = 0 – the line becomes horizontal, as workers only care about
real wages and amenities and are willing to relocate to a diﬀerent city for any inﬁnitesimal
diﬀerence in real wages net of amenities.
In equilibrium, when s = 0, all workers are
indiﬀerent between the two communities and there are no inframarginal workers. Conversely,
14This ﬁgure was constructed by setting s = 1, ka = kb = .5, za = zb = 1, and Aa = Ab = 0, and
X
1
α
a = X
1
α
b = 1 and τb = 0.
10

Figure 1: Equilibrium
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
−5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
5
Fraction in city a
 
 
sΛ−1(Na)
va − vb (τa=0)
va − vb (τa=.25)
Na
*
Na
**
as s approaches inﬁnity, the blue line becomes nearly vertical as workers are willing to pay
anything to locate in their preferred city.
Figure 1 can be used to assess graphically how the fraction of workers in city a changes
in response to changes in location fundamentals. Increasing the supply of housing in city
a (i.e. lowering za) reduces the slope of the green curve and increases N ∗
a. An increase in
either the amenity (Aa) or productivity (Xa) level of city a will shift the green curve up and
increase the fraction of workers in that city while an increase in the amenity or productivity
levels of city b will have the opposite eﬀect.
A similar eﬀect is generated by the introduction of a wage subsidy in city a. Because
the wage subsidy makes it cheaper for ﬁrms to hire workers in a, the size of the city grows.
Figure 1 shows that an increase of τa from zero to 0.25 raises the equilibrium fraction in city
a from N ∗
a to N ∗∗
a . This new equilibrium yields a higher systematic component of utility in
city a relative to city b, which means the economic rents accruing to prior residents of city
a increase.
11

2.3
Labor and Housing Markets Eﬀects
While Figure 1 is useful for illustrating the comparative statics of city size and consumer
surplus, it is useful to have expressions for the broader impacts of a place based subsidy on
labor and housing markets in the two cities.
A small increase in the wage subsidy to city a yields an increase in nominal wages there:
dwa
dτa
=
wa
1 −τa
.
(13)
By contrast, nominal wages in city b are unaﬀected. Attracted by higher wages, workers
leave b to move to a:
dNa
dτa
=
NaNb
s + kbrbNa + karaNb
wa
1 −τa
> 0.
(14)
Note that the number of movers is larger the smaller is s and the larger is the elasticity
of housing supply in city a (i.e. the smaller is ka). A smaller s implies that idiosyncratic
preferences for location are less important, and therefore that labor is more mobile in response
to real wage diﬀerentials. A smaller ka means that it is easier for city a to add new housing
units to accommodate the increased demand generated by the in-migrants.
Because of in-migration, the cost of housing in city a increases while that in city b
decreases:
dra
dτa
=
karaNb
s + kbrbNa + karaNb
wa
1 −τa
> 0
(15)
drb
dτa
=
−
kbrbNa
s + kbrbNa + karaNb
wa
1 −τa
< 0
(16)
This increase in city a’s housing costs is increasing in ka while the decrease in city b’s housing
costs is increasing in kb.
Real wages in a increase by:
d(wa −ra)
dτa
=
s + kbrbNa
s + kbrbNa + karaNb
wa
1 −τa
> 0.
(17)
Since wages in b are unaﬀected by outmigration, the real wage change in b is given simply
by the cost of living drop in (16).
Thus, real wages increase in both cities. In the target city, real wages increase because
the subsidy raises nominal wages more than housing costs. In city b, real wages rise because
of outmigration. In general, the increase in city a is (weakly) larger than the increase in city
b, which is intuitive given that city a is the target city and labor is not inﬁnitely mobile.
However, when labor is inﬁnitely mobile (s = 0) the increase is the same in the two cities.
2.4
Welfare
We now have all the elements needed to quantify the impact of the policy on worker and
landlord welfare in each city and in the aggregate.
12

A Graphical Example
To build intuition for the welfare impacts of a place based policy, we start with the
example of the two cities represented in Figure 1. The green line in Figure 2 depicts the
average worker utility that would prevail if, instead of allowing workers to migrate on their
own, we forced a fraction of them to locate in city a, allocating them in order of their
preference for city a relative to city b.15 The blue line depicts aggregate landlord proﬁts
Πa + Πb.
Figure 2: Welfare as a Function of City a’s Share
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
Fraction in city a
 
 
Landlord Profits
Average Worker Utility
Social Welfare
Na
*
Na
**
Because in this example the two cities are initially identical, and housing costs increase
non-linearly in city size, aggregate worker utility is maximized when half of the workers live
in city a and half in city b, which is the decentralized equilibrium. At this point housing
prices in the two cities are minimized and the sum of worker utility and landlord proﬁts is
maximized. This is a natural implication of the First Welfare Theorem – in the absence of
15One can show that this allocation scheme yields average worker utility Na(va −ln Na) + Nb(vb −ln Nb),
which is what is plotted in Figure 2.
13

subsidies, our model exhibits complete markets and no externalities. Hence, we expect the
decentralized equilibrium to maximize total economy-wide welfare, which in this case is the
sum of worker welfare and landlord proﬁts.
Instituting a wage subsidy for community a distorts prices, which shifts the equilibrium
to a socially suboptimal allocation N ∗∗
a
where average worker utility is slightly lower and
landlord proﬁts are slightly higher.
The resulting decrease in total social welfare is the
standard deadweight loss familiar from the study of taxation (Auerbach and Hines, 2002).
Figure 3: Worker Utility by City
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
−0.8
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Λ( e i b−e i a
s
)
 
 
Utility in a (τa=0)
Utility in b (τa=0)
Utility in a (τa=.25)
Utility in b (τa=.25)
Gains to Original
Residents of a
Losses to Stayers in b
Losses to Movers
Gains to movers
In exchange for these deadweight losses, our place based policy may yield socially desirable
eﬀects on the distribution of utility. Suppose that, for reasons outside of our model, we are
interested in transferring resources from the residents of city b to those of city a, perhaps
because the residents of city a have been mistreated in the past.16 Does the wage subsidy
16In the interest of parsimony we have ignored worker income heterogeneity, and thus cannot consider here
redistribution across groups with heterogeneous endowments. However, it is straightforward to generalize
the model to include multiple skill types each with a diﬀerent valuation of local amenities (See for example
14

reach its intended target population?
Figure 3 shows the utility of each resident of our economy under each possible location
choice. Workers are ordered in terms of their relative taste for city a, from greatest to least.
The solid blue line is downward sloping because the taste for city a declines as we move
to the right.17 Likewise, the solid green line is upward sloping because the taste for city b
increases as we move to the right.
Subsidizing city a shifts the blue line up by the amount of the change in real wages net
of taxes and the green line down by the corresponding eﬀect on disposable income there.
From the Figure, we see that the subsidy yields a windfall to the original residents of city a,
who receive higher real wages. This gain is accomplished via a transfer from the residents of
city b who are made worse oﬀby higher taxes. Workers who are not too attached to city b
respond by moving to city a. For some of them, this move leaves them better oﬀthan they
were under the prior unsubsidized regime. But others, who felt a stronger attachment to
city b, are worse oﬀeven after moving.
From Figure 2, we know the gains to original residents of city a and movers are outweighed
by the losses to prior residents of city b. These aggregate losses stem both from a transfer to
landlords (particularly those in city a) and the aforementioned deadweight loss. Deadweight
losses result from worker mobility. Note that, in Figure 3, even movers who gain from the
subsidy experience less of a gain than the original residents of city a. Yet, by moving, they
add to the revenue cost of the wage subsidy just like original residents. Thus, there is a
subgroup for whom an extra dollar of wage credits is valued at less than a dollar, which is
the source of the program’s eﬃciency cost.
Analytical Results
Our graphical analysis was predicated on a particular choice of parameter values. To
explore the model more generally, we now derive explicit formulas for the marginal impact
of a wage subsidy on worker and landlord welfare. From (2) and our Extreme Value assump-
tion on the idiosyncratic component of utility, average worker utility given optimal location
choices can be written:
V ≡E max{Uia, Uib} = s log(exp(va/s) + exp(vb/s))
(18)
which follows from standard results on the inclusive value of Logit models (e.g. McFadden,
1978; Rust, 1987).
Moretti (2011)). If lower skilled workers are predominately located in city b and are not particularly mobile,
then there may be an equity argument for targeting transfers to this community.
17More precisely, the average taste for city a declines as the relative taste for city a declines. In particular,
one can show that, when s = 1, E[eia|eia −eib = k] = −1 −ln (Λ(k)). Thus, the expected utility of living in
city a for a worker with eia −eib = Λ−1(Na) is va −1 −ln Na. The corresponding utility of living in city b
for such a person is vb −1 −ln(1 −Na). Figure 3 plots these functions holding (va, vb) at their equilibrium
values, i.e. for va = va(N ∗
a) when τa = 0 and va = va(N ∗∗
a ) when τa = .25.
15

Simple diﬀerentiation reveals that a small increase in the subsidy to community a yields
the following eﬀect on aggregate worker welfare:
dV
dτa
= Na
d
dτa
(wa −ra) + Nb
d
dτa
(wb −rb) −dt
dτa
(19)
Thus, to ﬁrst order, the impact of a subsidy to city a equals the impact on the real wages of
city a times the share of workers in that city plus the impact on the real wages of city b times
the share of workers in that city minus the cost of raising funds. Put diﬀerently, the impact
on worker welfare is equal to the increase in total earnings minus the increase in total rents
that would result if none of the workers moved minus the subsidy cost.18 The movers do
not show up in this expression (there are no terms of the form dNc
dτa ) because, to ﬁrst order,
they were indiﬀerent about the two communities to begin with – a standard implication of
the envelope theorem. Inspection of Figure 3 provides graphical intuition for this: the size
of the welfare gains and losses of movers are proportional to the size of the subsidy. Hence,
for a small change, movers are about as well oﬀas they would be had they not switched
communities.19
Using (16) and (17), equation (19) evaluates to:
dV
dτa
=

waNa −
karaNaNb
s + karaNb + kbrbNa
+
kbrbNaNb
s + karaNb + kbrbNa

1
1 −τa
(20)
−waNa −dwa
dτa
Naτa −τawa
dNa
dτa
=
−(kara −kbrb)
NaNb
s + karaNb + kbrbNa
|
{z
}
Cost of Living Increase
1
1 −τa
−waτa
NaNb
s + karaNb + kbrbNa
|
{z
}
Deadweight Loss
(21)
Equation (20) indicates that the increased subsidy represents a transfer of size
waNa
1−τa to
workers in city a paid for by all taxpayers. This has no net eﬀect on average worker utility,
but clearly makes workers in city b worse oﬀand workers in city a better oﬀ.
In addition to inducing a transfer to workers in a, the subsidy can lower average worker
utility for two reasons. First, as illustrated by the ﬁrst term in (21), the subsidy can change
the average cost of living. Depending on the elasticities of housing supply in the two cities,
the average worker’s cost of living may increase or decrease in response to the subsidy. Any
increases (decreases) constitute a net transfer to (from) landlords.20 As already discussed,
landlords in city a beneﬁt from the subsidy while those in city b suﬀer a reduction in rents.
The rent reduction in b unambiguously beneﬁts residents of community b who experience no
corresponding change in wages.
18This result relies on our assumption of linear utility. With nonlinear utility and heterogeneous endow-
ments, the distribution of wealth across workers and the degree of curvature in utility would inﬂuence the
aggregate welfare eﬀects of a policy change.
19See Busso, Gregory, and Kline (2013) for a proof that this envelope condition holds more generally
without the extreme value assumption on the errors.
20To see this note that
d
dτa Πc(rc) = kcrcNc d ln Nc
dτa . Hence, dΠa+Πb
dτa
equals the ﬁrst term in (21).
16

Second, as illustrated by the second term in (21), the subsidy also yields deadweight costs
of taxation. These deadweight costs come from distorting prices that (in the absence of other
market imperfections) govern the optimal allocation of workers to cities. Speciﬁcally, from
our earlier envelope theorem intuition, workers who switch cities in order to claim subsidies
are no better oﬀbut cost taxpayer money in the form of wage credits. These movers make
the cost to society of funding the wage credit greater than the value of the resulting transfers.
Note that the deadweight costs are proportional to dNa
dτa and fall to zero as s approaches
inﬁnity. Thus, we have the somewhat ironic result that the most eﬃcient place based policy is
one that induces no mobility response and hence creates no additional jobs! This is the crux
of the equity-eﬃciency tradeoﬀ. The best subsidy of all is one that simply raises earnings
in the targeted locality without inducing a behavioral response. If workers are very mobile,
then society must have a strong preference for the workers in city a in order to be willing to
bear the eﬃciency costs associated with distorting the location of jobs.
An important caveat is that our model assumes a ﬁnite fully employed workforce with
ﬁxed labor supply. By assumption, such models imply that all policy induced job growth in
an area comes at the expense of an equal number of jobs elsewhere. Adding a labor force
participation margin as in Busso, Gregory, and Kline (2013) would allow for the possibility
that aggregate employment increases in response to a place based subsidy. Even so, raising
employment in such a model is distortionary as it crowds out home production. Of course,
such models do not allow for the possibility that some households wish to work but are unable
to ﬁnd jobs. We consider this possibility in Section 3 which discusses market failures.21
2.5
Locally Financed Place Based Policies
Our discussion so far has centered on the case where place based policies are exogenously
set and ﬁnanced by a larger federal government. In many cases, however, localities compete to
attract outside investment and new employers, making the policies themselves endogenous.22
Bidding contests of this type can be thought of as auctions where multiple buyers oﬀer
bids to a limited number of sellers (Greenstone and Moretti, 2004). Competition among
localities implies that some of the incidence of local subsidies shifts away from workers and
landowners to ﬁrms. To see this, consider the case of a ﬁrm trying to decide where to locate
21With unemployment comes the possibility that local government spending can raise output by more than
the social cost of funds. For example Wingender and Suarez Serrato (2011a) ﬁnd a local income multiplier
of 1.88. However these ﬁndings are also consistent with the presence of neoclassical product linkages. For
example if government subsidized the local traded goods sector that also demands local nontraded goods as
intermediate inputs, one can achieve a positive multiplier.
22In 2011, for example, San Francisco approved a cut in payroll taxes in the mid-Market Street area, where
Twitter and other high tech companies are located. The payroll-tax zone exempted employers from the 1.5%
levy for new hires made after ﬁrms move to the mid-market area. In addition, the city exempted stock-
based compensation from payroll tax through the city. Both measures where designed to retain high tech
companies within the city jurisdiction. In 2011, the payroll-tax revenue forgone amounted to $2.8 million.
(Letzing, 2012)
17

a new establishment, and a large number of counties trying to lure it to their jurisdiction.
Assume that the entire cost of the subsidy is paid for by the winning county. The value to
a county of attracting an establishment is the increase in worker and landowner welfare it
generates, either indirectly through tax revenue or directly through agglomeration eﬀects.
When locations are homogenous – and therefore have homogeneous valuations of estab-
lishments – competition among counties ensures that the winning bid rises to the point that
makes the winner indiﬀerent between attracting the plant and not attracting it. In this case,
the place based policy has no eﬀect on residents’ welfare since all the beneﬁt of attracting
the new employer is transferred to the ﬁrm. When locations are heterogeneous, the county
that has the highest valuation wins by raising its bid to the point that makes the county
with the second highest value indiﬀerent between winning and losing. In this case, local
workers and landowners capture a fraction of the overall beneﬁt. This fraction is larger the
larger the heterogeneity across locations.
2.6
Empirical Evidence on Two Place Based Policies
Having considered the theoretical equity-eﬃciency tradeoﬀs inherent in place based poli-
cies, it is useful to take a look at the empirical evidence on some actual programs. Two of
the most heavily studied plac