DO RURAL BANKS MATTER? 
EVIDENCE FROM THE INDIAN SOCIAL BANKING EXPERIMENT 
 
Robin Burgess 
London School of Economics and Political Science 
 
and 
 
Rohini Pande 
Yale University 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents: 
1. Introduction 
2. Data and Program Description 
3. Identification Strategy 
4. Effects on Rural Development 
5. Discussion 
References 
Data Appendix 
Tables 1 – 11 
Figures 1 - 9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Suntory Centre 
 
 
 
 
 
Suntory and Toyota International Centres for 
 
 
 
 
 
Economics and Related Disciplines 
 
 
 
 
 
London School of Economics and Political Science 
Discussion Paper 
 
 
Houghton Street 
No. DEDPS/40 
 
 
London WC2A 2AE 
August 2003  
 
 
Tel.: 020-7955 6674 
 
 
We thank Esther Duflo for very helpful and detailed comments. We have benefited from 
comments and suggestions from Josh Angrist, Abhijit Banerjee, Tim Besley, Richard 
Blundell, Bronwen Burgess, Anne Case, Ken Chay, Dom Leggett, Jonathan Murdoch, Atif 
Mian, Andrew Newman, Debraj Ray, Mark Rosenzweig, Ken Sokoloff, Duncan Thomas, 
Robert Townsend, and seminar participants at the Bureau for Research in Economic 
Analysis of Development (BREAD) 2002 Meeting, Caltech, Cornell, Harvard, IMF, LSE, 
Michigan, MIT, NYU, Princeton, Southampton, Stanford, Stockholm, UBC, UCLA, UCSD, 
World Bank and Yale. Juan de Laiglesia, Mattia Romani, Gaurav Shah, Heideeflower Stoller 
and Grace Wong provided exceptional research assistance. 
 

 
 
Abstract 
 
Lack of access to finance is often cited as a key reason why poor people remain 
poor. This paper uses data on the Indian rural branch expansion program to provide 
empirial evidence on this issue. Between 1977 and 1990, the Indian Central Bank 
mandated that a commercial bank can open a branch in a location with one or more 
bank branches only if it opens four in locations with no bank branches. We show that 
between 1977 and 1990 this rule caused banks to open relatively more rural 
branches in Indian states with lower initial financial development. The reverse is true 
outside this period. We exploit this fact to identify the impact of opening a rural bank 
on poverty and output. Our estimates suggest that the Indian rural branch expansion 
program significantly lowered rural poverty, and increased non-agricultural output. 
 
Keywords: Finance and development; rural banking; bank licensing; credit 
constraints; structural change; diversification; redistribution; poverty, growth. 
 
JEL Nos.: E5, G2, H1, H4, I3, N2, O0, O1, O2, O4. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© The authors. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two 
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, 
including  notice, is given to the source. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contact address: 
Dr Robin Burgess, STICERD, London School of Economics and Political Science, 
Houghton Street, London WC2A 2AE, UK. Email: r.burgess@lse.ac.uk 
 

1
Introduction
A key objective in development economics is to work out ways to lift people out of
poverty. Access to ﬁnance has been seen as a critical factor in enabling people to
transform their production and employment activities and to exit poverty (Banerjee
and Newman 1993; Aghion and Bolton 1997; Banerjee, 2001). Countries with better
developed ﬁnancial systems, it is argued, should be better able to exploit growth op-
portunities (Schumpeter, 1934; Gerschenkron 1962; Greenwood and Jovanovic, 1990;
Bencivenga and Smith, 1991).
Financial development may also enhance ﬁnancial
stability with positive implications for economic performance (Bernanke and Gertler,
1990). While these arguments have often provided the theoretical justiﬁcation for
widespread government intervention in the banking sector, evidence on the success
of such interventions in reducing poverty remains limited.1 In this paper we use data
on the Indian rural bank branch expansion program — the largest ever attempted in
a developing country — to provide such evidence.
The Indian branch expansion program was representative of a whole host of state-
led rural ﬁnance programs that spread across the developing world in the post-colonial
period. This trend was not restricted to low income countries — in the United States,
for example, the Community Reinvestment Act of 1977 requires a bank to meet the
credit needs of its entire community, including low income neighborhoods (Zinman
2002). In most cases such ﬁnancial interventions went hand in hand with government
oversight of the banking sector, often aided by government ownership of banks.2
However, it is now widely believed that state control of the banking sector implied
that political, not economic, considerations determined the ﬂow of credit across sec-
tors and individuals. Political imperatives also implied that widespread loan default
on the part of borrowers was permitted, and made the banking sector more suscepti-
ble to elite capture (La Porta, Lopez-De-Silanes and Shleifer, 2003; Sapienza, 2003).
Some go as far as to claim that elite capture, combined with the imposition of interest
rate ceilings in the formal sector, led to ﬁnancial dualism wherein formal subsidized
funds are concentrated in the hands of the powerful few and terms in the informal
markets (on which the poor depend) worsened (see Adams et al 1984; Braverman
and Guasch 1986; Hoﬀand Stiglitz, 1998). In sum, it is believed that formal sub-
sidized credit was ineﬀective in reaching the poor, and may even have undermined
rural development and increased rural poverty.
However, the evidence in support of such claims remains thin. By virtue of their
vintage social banking episodes, though numerous and large in scale, have largely
escaped serious evaluation. And this is despite the fact that, even today, state provi-
sion remains the dominant source for formal ﬁnance in the rural areas of developing
1Cross country data shows that banking expansion and economic growth are positively correlated
(King and Levine, 1993; Levine and Zervos, 1998; Rajan and Zingales, 1998). However, the fact that
countries (or regions) with greater growth potential attract more banks renders a causal interpretation
problematic. In addition, the absence of comparable cross-country poverty data across time makes
working out the distributional impact of banking expansion problematic.
2La Porta, Lopez-De-Silanes and Shleifer (2002) report that, in the average country, 42 percent
of the equity of the ten largest banks remained government owned in 1995.

countries (Besley 1995). This paper seeks to address this lacuna in the literature.
India is an appropriate place for such an evaluation, both because of the size and
scope of the social banking experiment and also because it is home to close to a third
of the world’s poor, the bulk of whom are located in rural areas (Deaton and Dreze,
2002).
Between bank nationalization in 1969 and the onset of ﬁnancial liberalization in
1990 bank branches were opened in over 30,000 rural locations which had no prior
presence of commercial banks (henceforth, unbanked locations).3
Alongside, the
share of bank credit and savings which was accounted for by rural branches rose from
1.5 and 3 percent respectively to 15 percent each. The branch expansion program
was an integral part of India’s social banking experiment which sought to improve the
access of the rural poor to cheap formal credit. The preamble to the Bank Company
Acquisition Act of 1969 — the piece of legislation which empowered the state to
nationalize commercial banks — makes the intentions of the Indian government plain.
“The Banking system touches the lives of millions and has to be inspired
by a larger social purpose and has to subserve national priorities and ob-
jectives such as rapid growth of agriculture, small industries and exports,
raising of employment levels, encouragement of new entrepreneurs and
development of backward areas. For this purpose it is necessary for the
government to take direct responsibility for the extension and diversiﬁca-
tion of banking services and for the working of a substantial part of the
banking system”.
Key to the rural branch expansion endeavor was the imposition of the 1:4 license
rule in 1977. This rule stated that a bank could open a branch in a location with
one or more branches (now on, a banked location) only if it opened four in unbanked
locations. This rule was abandoned in 1990. States with lower initial ﬁnancial de-
velopment (as measured by the number of bank branches per capita in 1961) had a
higher incidence of unbanked locations. We use a panel data-set for the sixteen ma-
jor Indian states (1961-2000), and show that, between 1977 and 1990, the 1:4 license
rule caused ﬁnancially less developed states to attract more rural branches than their
more ﬁnancially developed counterparts. The reverse was true outside this period.
We show that an identical temporal and geographic pattern exists for rural poverty
— rural poverty reductions were more rapid in states with lower ﬁnancial development
between 1977 and 1990. The opposite was true outside this period. In contrast, po-
litical and policy variables which may have reduced poverty in India over this period
did not show trend breaks in their relationship with initial ﬁnancial development in
1977 or 1990. This allows us to use the trend breaks in 1977 and 1990 in the rela-
tionship between a state’s initial ﬁnancial development and rural branch expansion
as instruments for the number of rural locations banked in a state. Our instrumental
variable estimates suggest that a one percent increase in the number of rural banked
locations reduced rural poverty by 0.36 percent and increased total output by 0.55
3Locations here refer to villages, towns and cities as deﬁned by the Indian census.
2

percent. The output eﬀects are solely accounted for by increases in non-primary sec-
tor output — a ﬁnding which suggests that increased ﬁnancial intermediation in rural
India aided output and employment diversiﬁcation out of agriculture.
The rapid increase in the Indian rural branch network and rural credit and sav-
ings share after bank nationalization in 1969, and the subsequent slowdown post
1990, has been widely documented (Nair 2000). However, evidence on the impact of
the social banking program on poverty remains limited. Our ﬁndings on output line
up with Binswanger, Khandker and Rozensweig (1993) and Binswanger and Khand-
ker (1995). These papers use Indian district-level data, and ﬁnd that rural branch
expansion increased non-agricultural but not agricultural growth.4 Our results are
also consistent with the simulations by Townsend and Ueda (2001) based on Thai
data which show that increased participation in the formal ﬁnancial sector enhances
growth. By exploiting the policy induced reversal in the relationship between ini-
tial branch placement we are able to control for endogenous bank branch placement
and to identify the impact of rural branch expansion on poverty. Our identiﬁcation
strategy is related to a number of recent program evaluation studies which exploit
policy-induced trend breaks in the variables of interest for identiﬁcation purposes —
important related examples include Duﬂo (2001) and Almond, Chay and Greenstone
(2002).
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data we use, and the
program we study. Section 3 contains our identiﬁcation strategy, and Section 4 the
empirical analysis. Section 5 discusses the policy implications of our ﬁndings.
2
Data and Program Description
2.1
Data
We use a panel data-set for the sixteen major Indian states over the period 1961-2000.
We start in 1961 as it is the year of the census which preceded bank nationalization.
Also, our poverty and output series begin around this year. Table 1 gives the means
and standard deviations for our main variables and the Data Appendix information
on variable deﬁnitions and data sources.5
We use a branch level data-set which records, for every bank branch opened since
1805, the date it was opened, whether it was situated in a rural location and the
number of branches already existing in that location to construct three measures of
ﬁnancial development (Reserve Bank of India, 2000).6 The number of bank branches
per 100,000 persons in a state in 1961 is our measure of initial ﬁnancial development.
4Eastwood and Kohli (1999) use ﬁrm level data and ﬁnd that the branch expansion program and
directed lending program enhanced small scale industrial activity in India. Our ﬁndings are also in
line with Dehejia and Lleras-Muney (2002) who ﬁnd that ﬁnancial development was associated with
manufacturing growth in US states between 1900 and 1940.
5The sixteen states in our sample cover over 95% of the Indian population. For some variables
the data span fewer years; details are in the Data Appendix.
6We always use the census deﬁnition of a rural location — that is, a location with a population of
less than 10,000 persons. This is the same deﬁnition used to distinguish rural from urban poverty.
3

If a branch is the ﬁrst to be opened in a rural location we classify it as having
opened in a rural unbanked location. In our sample states between 1961 and 2000 the
number of rural locations so banked increased from 116 to 30,428. The total number
of branches opened in rural unbanked locations per 100,000 persons is our ‘social
banking’ measure. A branch opening in a census location with at least one bank is
classiﬁed as opening in a banked location. Our third measure of ﬁnancial development
is the number of branches opened in already banked locations per 100,000 persons.
Figure 1 charts the evolution of (cumulative) branch openings in banked, unbanked
and rural unbanked locations.
Every bank branch in our sample is a distinct physical entity which undertakes
both deposit-taking and lending activities.7 Deposit taking is relatively straightfor-
ward, with the interest rate and other terms and conditions laid down by the Indian
central bank. In the area of lending, bank branch oﬃcials enjoy discretion in choosing
borrowers, subject to satisfying directed lending targets for the so-called ‘priority’ sec-
tors of agriculture, entrepreneurs and small scale industry. The Indian central bank
mandates that every bank branch satisfy a credit-deposit ratio of 60 percent within
its geographical area of operation — this is to ensure that lending activities are not
concentrated in urban locales.
In 2000, the Indian rural banking sector accounted for the rupee equivalent of
26,768 million dollars as deposits and 10,834 million dollars as loans outstanding.
In terms of population reached, the rural sector accounted for 125 million savings
accounts and 25 million borrowing accounts.8 Figure 2 shows the dramatic expansion
in rural savings and credit over our sample period; the ﬁgure plots the state-wise
shares of total bank credit and savings accounted for by rural banks. Finally, in
terms of lending portfolio the average rural bank lent 38.6 percent to agriculture, 27.5
percent to industry, 13.9 percent to trade and 9 percent as personal loans (Reserve
Bank of India, 2000).
In Table 2, we use Indian household survey data to decompose rural household
debt by source for ten year intervals between 1951 and 1991. In 1951, four years after
independence, the informal credit sector accounted for the bulk of rural lending, with
moneylenders contributing close to 70 percent of the total. In contrast, less than
one percent of rural household debt came from commercial banks. These banks were
conﬁned to urban areas and geared towards the ﬁnancing of trade and commerce
activities (Reserve Bank of India, 1954).9
By 1971 lending by commercial banks
contributed only 3 percent to rural household debt. However, by 1991 this ﬁgure
7The average bank branch is staﬀed by one oﬃcer, two clerks, one of whom also acts as the
cashier, and one security guard.
8If we assume every savings account is held by a diﬀerent person and the rural population consisted
of 700 million persons in 2000, then roughly one in every ﬁve or six rural persons had a savings account
by 2000.
9These ﬁndings were published the 1951 All-India Credit Survey Report (Reserve Bank of India,
1954). It concluded that ﬁnancial backwardness was a root cause of rural poverty, and that commer-
cial banks needed to be harnessed to enhance formal credit in rural areas — both to enable poor, rural
households to adopt new technologies and production processes, and to displace ‘evil’ moneylenders
who exploited their monopoly power to charge high rates of interest. These conclusions guided Indian
rural banking policy for the next four decades.
4

had risen ten fold to 29 percent. Over the same time period the moneylender share
of rural household debt more than halved from 35 to 15.7 percent. Thus over this
period, arguably due to the large scale expansion of commercial banks into rural
India, commercial banks transited from being the smallest to the largest lender in
rural areas. Our focus is on identifying the economic implications of this change in
rural India.
India is unique amongst developing countries in having carried out household ex-
penditure surveys on a regular basis since the 1950s. This allows us to construct a
consistent and comparable series of rural and urban poverty measures across our pe-
riod.10 We use the head count ratio which measures the proportion of the population
below the Indian poverty line. Poverty incidence in India is high — over the 1961-2000
period 48 percent of the rural and 40 percent of the urban population are classiﬁed
as poor. Figure 3 shows the evolution of poverty across Indian states between 1961
and 1990. Up to the early 1970s there are sharp year-to-year ﬂuctuations followed by
a downward trend in both the rural and urban series between 1973 and 1990. Imme-
diately after 1990, as India entered a period of economic liberalization, the pattern
becomes less clear with considerable debate over the net direction (Deaton 2001). The
most recent ﬁgures suggests that the post 1990 trend is overall downward. What is
even more striking, however, are the diﬀerences in poverty trajectories across states.
A key objective of this paper is to examine whether the pattern of branch expansion
into rural unbanked areas altered these rural poverty trajectories. Over this period
real male agricultural wages, an important inverse correlate of rural poverty, doubled.
Given the controversy surrounding the more recent poverty ﬁgures using agricultural
wages as an alternative dependent variable provides a useful robustness check.
Separate output estimates for the rural and urban sectors of an Indian state are
unavailable.
For this reason, we focus on the sector-wise evolution of state out-
put. The primary sector which includes agriculture, forestry, ﬁsheries and mining is
mainly rural. The secondary sector consists of construction, registered and unregis-
tered manufacturing, and electricity, water and gas output. Of these, construction
and registered manufacturing are mainly located in the urban sector, while unregis-
tered manufacturing (which consists of small businesses which employ less than ten
persons with power, or twenty without) and electricity, water and gas output have
a substantial rural presence. The tertiary sector consists of various service sectors
such as trade and transportation which occur in both rural and urban areas. In
1961 the primary sector contributed the most to total state output; however, since
the mid 1970s the growth rates in the non-primary sector exceeded those in the
primary sector (see Figure 4). We examine the links, if any, between rural branch
expansion and sector-wise increases in economic activity. Evidence both from the
economic history and economic development literatures suggests the process of struc-
tural change, where the secondary and tertiary sectors become the main contributors
to total output, is typically associated with poverty reduction (see Chenery, Robinson
10We are grateful to Gaurav Datt and Martin Ravallion for providing us these state-level poverty
ﬁgures (see Ozler, Datt and Ravallion (1996)). Gaurav Datt was kind enough to provide us with
comparable updates which allowed us to extend the series from 1994-2000.
5

and Syrquin, 1986; Dehejia and Lleras-Muney, 2002; Burgess and Venables, 2003).
We also examine whether the fraction of non-agricultural laborers in the rural labor
force is aﬀected.
2.2
The Program
In 1969 the fourteen largest Indian commercial banks were nationalized, at which
point they came under the direct control of the Indian central bank and were formally
incorporated into the planning architecture of the country (Balachandran, 1998).
Bank nationalization was intended to allow the state to target ﬁnancial backwardness
as a means of promoting social objectives. A central aim was to reduce and equalize
the average population per bank branch across Indian states.
To achieve this the Indian central bank adopted an area approach whereby un-
banked locations — census locations with no prior presence of commercial banks —
were targeted (Desai 1987). At any point in time, the central bank sought to ﬁll
unbanked locations with populations exceeding a speciﬁc number. Unbanked loca-
tions in states whose population per bank branch exceeded the national average had
priority. Over time, as unbanked locations were ﬁlled, the population target was
lowered. The priority status assigned to ﬁnancially less developed states, combined
with a common deﬁnition for unbanked locations across Indian states, meant that
more unbanked locations were targeted in ﬁnancially backward states.
In every Indian district a commercial bank was designated as the Lead Bank and
made responsible for identifying unbanked locations (based on the criteria set by the
central bank). Every three years new (district-wise) lists of unbanked locations were
drawn up by the central bank (in consultation with Lead Banks and state development
authorities) and made available to commercial banks working in a district. The Lead
Bank was responsible for coordinating branch expansion into these locations with
other commercial banks working in the district.11
The Indian central bank, however, still needed to coerce commercial banks to
expand into unbanked, rural locations. In particular, in states where unbanked loca-
tions were remote and/or unproﬁtable. Under the Banking Regulation Act of 1949
commercial banks have to obtain a license from the central bank in order to open a
new branch. On January 1, 1977 the Indian central bank announced that to qualify
to open a branch in an already banked location a commercial bank must open four
in unbanked locations.12 In 1990 the licensing procedure was frozen, and in 1991
formally repealed. At this point it was deemed that future branch expansion should
depend on “need, business potential and ﬁnancial viability of location” (Government
of India, 1991).
Branch level data shows that the 1:4 rule was binding — the annual ratio of bank
branches opened in unbanked locations to total branches opened stands at, or around,
11The district is the administrative unit below a state. An alternative would be undertake the
analysis at the district level. However, annual poverty and output estimates are only available at
the state level.
12Up to this point banks had enjoyed some latitude as regards branch placement as the central
bank emphasized the banking of towns and the need to satisfy pent up urban demand.
6

0.8 for every year between 1977 and 1990, and falls to zero thereafter. This eﬀect
is also visible in Figure 1 which shows that from about 1975 onwards, increases in
the number of locations banked are due to increases in the number of rural locations
banked.
Between 1977 and 1990 branch expansion into rural unbanked locations
accelerated while that of already banked locations fell. After 1990 branch expansion in
unbanked locations came to a halt, while that in already banked locations increased.
To date, a bank cannot close a rural branch if it is the only branch servicing the
location. The 1990 rural branch network is therefore, in eﬀect, frozen.13
The typical commercial bank in India operates in districts in both ﬁnancially
developed and backward states (either as a Lead Bank or collaborator). The cen-
tral bank prioritized branch expansion in ﬁnancially backward states, and this was
reﬂected in the unbanked location lists. Therefore, compliance with the 1:4 rule im-
plied that banks opened more branches in unbanked locations in ﬁnancially backward
states. Figure 5 shows the equalization and reduction in population per bank branch
across Indian states over this period. Between 1961 and 2000 the average population
per bank branch fell tenfold from 139,790 to 14,681. There is some, albeit limited,
evidence of convergence in population per bank branch across Indian states prior
to nationalization. Convergence, however, is much stronger between 1970 and 1990,
with the post-1976 convergence driven by diﬀerential rates of rural branch expansion
across Indian states. By 1990, all states were at or below the national target of 17,000
persons per bank branch. Interestingly, after the removal of placement restrictions
in 1990 and an increase in branch building in already banked locations there is some
evidence that population per bank branch began to increase and diverge across In-
dian states with more backward states seeing larger increases (see inset panel, Figure
5).
This period also saw the central bank aﬀect the credit policies of commercial
banks. Since 1968, the central bank has mandated that a certain fraction of every
bank’s lending had to be to individuals or ﬁrms who are in the ‘priority’ sector. This
sector includes agriculture, entrepreneurs and small scale industries.14 These loans
were intended to encourage new productive activities, and were also disbursed via
rural bank branches. However, unlike rural branch expansion, the incidence of these
credit policies does not vary with a state’s initial ﬁnancial development.
3
Identiﬁcation Strategy
In this section we demonstrate that the bulk of rural branch expansion in India was
policy-driven and signiﬁcantly increased the ﬂows of bank credit and savings to rural
areas. The ﬁrst fact allows for a credible evaluation of the branch expansion program,
and the second implies we can interpret our results as informative of the economic
13Additional credit needs of the rural population post 1990 are supposed to be met through other
means, principally microﬁnance (Ramachandran and Swaminathan, 2001).
14These targets were ratcheted up over time — they started at 33 percent of total bank lending and
have stood at 40 percent since 1985.
7

impact of state-led ﬁnancial intermediation.15
The 1:4 license rule sought to coerce commercial banks to open more branches
in rural unbanked locations in less ﬁnancially developed states. The underlying as-
sumption was that ﬁnancially developed states oﬀered more proﬁtable locations for
banks and therefore, in the absence of such a rule, would attract more branches. This
suggests that if the rule had any bite its imposition in 1977 and subsequent removal
in 1990 should have altered the relationship between initial ﬁnancial development of
a state and subsequent rural branch expansion. To examine this possibility we run a
ﬁxed eﬀects regression of the form:
BR
it = αi + βt +
2000
X
t=1961
(Bi61 × Dk)γk +
2000
X
t=1961
(Xi61 × Dk)δk + ²it
(1)
αi and βt are state and year eﬀects respectively. BR
it, the number of branches opened
in rural unbanked locations per capita, is our social banking measure and Bi61, the
number of bank branches per capita in state i in 1961, our measure of initial ﬁnancial
development.16
Dk is a dummy which equals one where k = t.
The coeﬃcient
set γk captures the year-wise eﬀect of initial ﬁnancial development on rural branch
expansion. As other initial conditions in a state may also have a time-varying eﬀect
on branch expansion we include a vector of control variables (Xi61) as additional
covariates. This vector includes log real state income per capita, population density
and the number of rural locations per capita, all measured in 1961. These controls
also enter the regression interacted with year dummies.
Figure 6 graphs the γk coeﬃcients for two speciﬁcations. The dots on the solid
line are the coeﬃcients from a speciﬁcation without the Xi61 controls, and the dots
on the broken line are from a speciﬁcation with the Xi61 controls. In both cases 1961
is the control year, and the 1961 dummy is omitted.17 γk summarizes the eﬀect of
between-state variation in initial ﬁnancial development on the cumulative number of
branches opened in rural unbanked locations as of year t. As our dependent variable
is a cumulative variable, a comparison of the coeﬃcients for any two adjacent years
(γk and γk+1) is informative of the relationship between initial ﬁnancial development
and the growth in rural branch openings.
Over this period the number of rural banked locations trend upwards in every
state. However, two clear reversals in the relationship between a state’s initial ﬁ-
nancial development and the number of rural banked locations stand out in Figure
6 — one in 1977 and one in 1990. Between 1961 and 1977 the γk coeﬃcients increase
with time — that is, ﬁnancially more developed states witness higher growth of rural
banked locations. As banks enjoyed considerable leeway regarding where to locate
15Our focus on the economic impact of bank branches sidesteps many of the endogeneity problems
associated with a direct study of the impact of credit ﬂows. In a similar vein Jayarathne and Strahan
(1996) use information on when a U.S. state relaxed branching restrictions to examine how ﬁnancial
markets aﬀect economic growth
16Both variables are normalized by 1961 population.
The results are also robust to, instead,
normalizing the banking variables by land area (as in Binswanger, Khandker and Rosenzwieg 1993).
17We chose 1961 as it is the census year preceding bank nationalization. Our results are robust to
choosing any alternative year as the control year.
8

this suggests that ﬁnancially more developed states oﬀered banks greater proﬁt op-
portunities. This relationship is reversed in 1977 precisely when the 1:4 license rule
was imposed. Moreover, the reversal is not temporary. Between 1977 and 1990 the
γk coeﬃcients decrease with time — that is, ﬁnancially less developed states witnessed
higher growth of rural banked locations. After 1990 rural branch expansion into rural
unbanked locations ended, and is reﬂected in the lack of over time variation in the
size of the γk coeﬃcients. Overall, the precise correspondence in the timing of these
trend reversals and license regime shifts provides strong prima facie evidence that
the pattern of rural branch expansion across Indian states was policy driven.
We include the vector of economic controls, Xi61, as additional controls to check
that convergence in economic activity (as proxied for by income, population density or
number of rural locations) across Indian states is not driving the observed relationship
between rural branch expansion and initial ﬁnancial development. The broken line
graph in Figure 6 shows that this is not the case. If we graph out the δk coeﬃcients for
the interaction between initial state income and year dummies we ﬁnd the relationship
between initial state income and rural branch expansion is throughout positive (i.e.
the graph is upward sloping). That is, controlling for initial ﬁnancial development,
banks open more branches in states with higher initial state income.18
Further evidence that economic convergence does not underlie the trend reversals
in Figure 6 comes from data on branch openings in already banked locations. The 1:4
license rule linked branch expansion in already banked locations to that in unbanked
locations. Banks, however, were free to decide branch placement in already banked
locations. If the relationship between initial ﬁnancial development and bank prof-
itability remained unchanged during this period, then the imposition and subsequent
removal of the 1:4 license rule should have aﬀected the rate of branch expansion in
already banked locations but not its distribution across states.
To check this we
run regression (1) where the outcome variable is the cumulative number of branches
opened in banked locations per capita. Figure 7 graphs out the γk coeﬃcients on the
interaction between initial ﬁnancial development of a state (Bi61) and year dummies
(Dk). This relationship, though aﬀected by license regime shifts in 1977 and 1990,
is positive throughout. This mirrors what was happening with branch openings in
rural unbanked locations pre-1977 but is in strict contrast to what was happening
between 1977 and 1990.
In Figure 8 we examine the relationship between rural bank credit and initial ﬁ-
nancial development. That is, we report the γk coeﬃcients from regression (1) where
the dependent variable is the share of bank credit disbursed by rural branches.19 We
observe a pattern that mirrors that for rural unbanked locations (Figure 6). Disburse-
ments via rural banks are higher in more ﬁnancially developed states until around
1975 when there is a trend reversal. Between 1976 and 1989 we see more backward
states experiencing a greater share of credit being disbursed via rural banks. After
1989 the relationship between rural credit share and initial ﬁnancial development
18For obvious reasons, this relationship is much more muted between 1977 and 1990 if we exclude
the interaction between initial ﬁnancial development and year dummies from this regression.
19Data on credit and savings ﬂows from rural banks is only available from 1969.
9

reverts to being broadly positive. A similar pattern exists for the rural savings share.
The most likely explanation for the negative relationship between credit and saving
ﬂows and initial ﬁnancial development between mid 1970s and 1990 is the higher
growth of rural branches in ﬁnancially backward states. These ﬁndings put us on
stronger grounds in interpreting the economic eﬀects of rural banks as coming, at
least in part, through improved ﬁnancial intermediation in rural areas.
The key trend reversals in the relationship between rural branch expansion and
initial ﬁnancial intermediation occur in 1977 and 1990, with only very limited vari-
ation in this relationship in other years (Figure 6). The variation in Figure 6 can,
therefore, be summarized by a linear trend break model:
BR
it
=
αi + βt + (Bi61 × [t −61])γ1 + (Bi61 × [t −76] × P77)γ2 +
(2)
(Bi61 × [t −89] × P90)γ3 + (Bi61 × P77)γ4 + (Bi61 × P90)γ5 + ²it.
The ﬁrst coeﬃcient of interest, γ1, measures the trend relationship between initial
ﬁnancial development (Bi61) and rural branch expansion. To check for trend reversals
in this relationship we include two further interaction terms — ﬁrst, an interaction of
Bi61 with dummy variable which equals one post 1976 (P77) and a post 1976 time
trend (t−76), and second, an interaction of Bi61 with a dummy variable which equals
one post 1990 (P90) and a post 1989 time trend (t−89). To allow for intercept changes
we also include the interactions of Bi61 with P77 and P90 respectively. Finally, we
always include the set of additional controls Xi61, entered in the regression in the
same way as Bi61. A standard concern with diﬀerence in diﬀerence estimation using
panel data is serial correlation. Therefore in all regressions we cluster our standard
errors by state.
This procedure gives us an estimator of the variance covariance
matrix which is consistent in the presence of any correlation pattern within states
over time (Bertrand, Duﬂo and Mullainathan, 2002).20
Column (1) in Table 3 reports the trend break model results for branch expansion
into rural unbanked locations. Both the 1977 and 1990 trend reversals are statistically
signiﬁcant which lines up with the pattern observed in Figure 6.
It is useful to
interpret the reported coeﬃcients with reference to the states at the 25th and 75th
percentile of the initial ﬁnancial development distribution — Madhya Pradesh and
Tamil Nadu respectively. The initial ﬁnancial development of these two states diﬀer
by one point. The coeﬃcient γ1, given in the ﬁrst row, tells us that between 1961
and 1976, relative to Madhya Pradesh, 0.08 additional rural locations per capita were
banked in Tamil Nadu. The second row, which reports γ2, shows that this positive
trend was reversed between 1977 and 1990 with 0.16 fewer rural locations receiving
a branch in Tamil Nadu annually relative to Madhya Pradesh.21 Finally, the third
row, which reports γ3, tells us that after 1989 no rural branch expansion occurred
and hence, Tamil Nadu and Madhya Pradesh were equally likely to receive rural
20As Bertrand et al (2002) demonstrate for the US rejection rates using this method do increase
above 5 percent when the number of states falls below 20. As we only have 16 states in India the
signiﬁcance levels we obtain using this method should be treated as conservative.
21This is given by γ1 + γ2. F-test 1 shows that γ1 + γ2 is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero.
10

branches.22 In contrast, and in line with Figure 7, the results for branch expansion
into banked locations shown in column (2) do not show any trend reversals.
Columns (3) and (4) consider the relationship between the shares of bank credit
and savings disbursed by rural branches and initial ﬁnancial development.23 Prior
to 1977 both variables are uncorrelated with initial ﬁnancial development. However,
between 1977 and 1990 both are signiﬁcantly negatively correlated with initial ﬁnan-
cial development. Rural credit share exhibits a second trend reversal in 1990 with
rural credit and initial ﬁnancial development unrelated after 1990. Rural savings,
however, remain negatively related with initial ﬁnancial development post 1990. In
column (5) we ﬁnd no evidence of trend reversals in the case of the share of bank
lending going to priority sectors. This makes sense as priority sector targets were
set at the bank-level, and remained independent of the state-wise distribution of a
commercial bank’s rural and urban branches. In a similar vein in column (6) we see
no trend breaks in the relationship between the share of formal credit disbursed by
rural credit cooperatives and initial ﬁnancial development.24 The fact that the trend
breaks are only observed for variables which were directly aﬀected by licensing rule
increases our conﬁdence that the observed trend reversals are policy-driven.
4
Eﬀects on Rural Development
The exposure of an Indian state to the rural branch expansion program was jointly
determined by its initial ﬁnancial development and the license regime shifts in 1977
and 1990. Between 1977 and 1990 initial ﬁnancial development and rural branch
expansion were negatively correlated, with the reverse true outside this time-period.
We exploit this fact to provide two types of evidence on the link between rural
development and rural branch expansion.
In section 4.1 we check whether rural
development outcomes also exhibit trend breaks in 1977 and 1990 in their relationship
with initial ﬁnancial development, and in section 4.2 we use these trend breaks as
instruments for rural branch expansion.
4.1
Reduced Form Evidence
Basic Results
We start by examining the relationship between initial ﬁnancial development and
poverty outcomes.
The bold line in Figure 9 traces out the γk coeﬃcients for a
regression (of the form in equation (1)) where rural poverty is the dependent variable,
and the dotted line the γk coeﬃcients from a regression where urban poverty is the
dependent variable.
Each γk summarizes the eﬀect of between state variation in
initial ﬁnancial development on poverty in year t. The pattern across years thus
tells how poverty rose or fell in relation to the ﬁnancial development of a state. In
22γ1 + γ2 +γ3 equals zero. F-test 2 shows that γ1 + γ2+ γ3 does not diﬀer signiﬁcantly from zero.
23These data are only available from 1969.
24Credit cooperatives were the other main source of formal credit in rural areas across the 1961-
2000 period.
11

interpreting these coeﬃcients it is useful to remember that over our sample period
both rural and urban poverty series trend downwards (Figure 3). Figure 9 shows
that between 1970 and 1978 both rural and urban poverty correlate negatively with
ﬁnancial development. That is poverty falls more rapidly in states with higher initial
ﬁnancial development. After this the two series diverge. The urban poverty series
ﬂattens out in 1978 with the γk coeﬃcients close to zero until 1990. In contrast,
the rural poverty series continues its downward trend until the early 1980s after
which rural poverty reductions are more pronounced in less developed states until
1990.25 After 1990 both series return to being negatively correlated with ﬁnancial
development as they were pre-1978. The plot for rural poverty in Figure 9 is thus the
inverse of that for rural branch expansion in Figure 6. Backward states, in contrast,
did not experience more rapid urban poverty reduction between 1977 and 1990. This
matches up with the fact that branch expansion into urban locales which tended to
be already banked was higher in ﬁnancially developed states throughout the period
(Figure 7).
In Table 4 we summarize these, and other, ﬁndings for poverty outcomes using
our basic trend break model (see equation (2)). In column (1) we observe that rural
poverty reduction is more rapid in ﬁnancially developed states both before 1977 and
after 1990. This trend is, however, reversed between 1977 and 1990. Comparing the
states at the 25th (Madhya Pradesh) and 75th percentile (Tamil Nadu) of the initial
ﬁnancial development distribution these coeﬃcients imply that annual reductions in
the rural head count ratio were 0.77 percent higher in Tamil Nadu than Madhya
Pradesh before 1977. However, between 1977 and 1990 this trend was reversed with
Madhya Pradesh experiencing a 1.15 percent more rural poverty reduction per year
relative to Tamil Nadu. There is then a second reversal in 1990 when rural branch
expansion is discontinued. After this year the more developed state (Tamil Nadu)
experiences 1.15 percent more rural poverty reduction per year relative to the more
backward state (Madhya Pradesh). These results strongly suggest that more rapid
expansion of rural bank branches into more ﬁnancially backward states during the
1977-1990 period is aﬀecting poverty reduction in these states relative to what was
happening in more ﬁnancially developed states.
Consistent with the fact that we are evaluating a rural program, column (2) shows
that initial ﬁnancial development and urban poverty reductions are unrelated. Rural
poverty tends to lie above urban poverty in India (see Figure 3).
The results in
columns (1) and (2) imply that results for the diﬀerence between rural and urban
poverty will mirror those for rural poverty. The closing of the gap between rural and
urban poverty will be more rapid in more ﬁnancially developed states pre-1977 and
post-1990. In contrast between 1977 and 1990 it will be more backward states that
are experiencing more rapid closing of their rural-urban poverty gaps. The results
for aggregate poverty in column (3) also mirror those for rural poverty in column (1)
and tell us that changes in rural poverty drive the aggregate pattern.
25We would expect there to be a lag between the opening of rural branches and their exerting
any eﬀect on rural poverty. This may explain why trend breaks in poverty lead those in branch
expansion.
12

In column (4) we see that the results for real daily male agricultural wages mirror
those for rural poverty. Relative to ﬁnancially developed states, agricultural wages in
ﬁnancially backward states grew more quickly only between 1977 and 1990. Column
(4) serves as a robustness check on our poverty results, and points to an impor-
tant route through which rural branch expansion may have reduced poverty. As a
robustness check we show in column (5) that real wages for workers in registered
manufacturing — which is mainly located in the urban sector — do not exhibit breaks
in 1977 and 1990.
Table 5 considers diﬀerent components of state output. Column (1) tells us that
the relationship between state output per capita and initial ﬁnancial development
exhibited trend reversals in 1977 and 1990.
Evaluated at the sample mean, and
comparing states at the 25th and 75th percentile of the initial ﬁnancial development
distribution, the point estimates imply that, prior to 1977 annual increases in total
output were 18.5 Rupees per capita lower in Madhya Pradesh than Tamil Nadu. Be-
tween 1977 and 1990, this trend was exactly reversed. Post 1990 the pattern is both
reversed and magniﬁed. In columns (2) and (3) we see that this pattern is not shared
by primary sector output, or within this sector agricultural output.26 In column (4)
we see that non-primary sector output drove the growth in total output, with the
latter also exhibiting trend breaks in 1977 and 1990. Columns (5)-(8) focus in on the
diﬀerent components of the secondary sector. Initial ﬁnancial development is uncor-
related with construction output and registered manufacturing output. Both these
activities are concentrated in the urban sector. In contrast, column (7) shows that
unregistered manufacturing and initial ﬁnancial development are positively correlated
until 1977, negatively between 1977 and 1990 and positively thereafter. The small
businesses which make up unregistered manufacturing are important contributors to
non-agricultural output in the rural sector (Visaria and Basant, 1994). Electricity,
water and gas output is also negatively correlated with initial ﬁnancial development
after 1977 — this, possibly, also reﬂects the increase in rural non-agricultural activities.
In column (9) we examine tertiary sector output. Between 1977 and 1990 tertiary
sector output is lower in ﬁnancially developed states. The opposite is true outside
this period. Consistent with the thesis that the branch expansion program increased
rural non-primary sector output, in column (10) we observe that while before 1977
ﬁnancially developed states witnessed faster growth in the share of non-agricultural
laborers in total unskilled rural labor, this trend is reversed between 1977 and 1987.27
Robustness
We interpret the observed trend breaks in the rural development outcomes and initial
ﬁnancial development relationship as reﬂecting the economic eﬀects of rural branch
expansion. We have provided evidence that these changes were caused by the 1:4
license rule, not by a reversal in the relationship between an Indian state’s initial
ﬁnancial development and potential for economic growth after 1977.
A diﬀerent
26We have checked that the results are unaﬀected if we instead use agricultural output per hectare
as our dependent variable
27As our data series ends in 1987 we cannot check for a 1990 trend break in employment
13

source of potential omitted variable bias is poverty alleviation policies pursued by
state governments. In our estimation framework this is a cause of concern if key
political and policy variables which have the potential to inﬂuence rural development
exhibited trend reversals in their relationship with initial ﬁnancial development at
the same points as rural branch expansion. Table 6 examines this possibility.
The Congress party which had been the dominant party in Indian politics since
independence suﬀered a major electoral setback in 1977.28 A ﬁrst concern is that
the extent of state-wise ousting of Congress may have been systematically related to
both the state’s initial ﬁnancial development and the subsequent choice of state-level
public policies. Column (1), Table 6, however, ﬁnds no evidence of trend breaks
in the relationship between the fraction of Congress legislators and initial ﬁnancial
development in 1977 or 1990.
A second concern is that the 1977 political shock
realigned political interests between the center and states with possible implications
for resource ﬂows. More backward states, for example, may have received more federal
resources post-1977 as a result of this reconﬁguration.29 However, in column (2) we
ﬁnd no evidence of trend breaks in the relationship between center-state alignment, as
measured by whether the same party is in power in both places, and initial ﬁnancial
development.
The remainder of Table 6 considers an array of state-level anti-poverty policies.
In the ﬁrst few decades after independence land reform as a program for ushering in
a just social order was an important item on almost every state government’s policy
agenda (Besley and Burgess, 2000; Banerjee, Gertler and Ghatak, 2002). Using state
panel data 1958-1992 Besley and Burgess (2000) show that this land reform measure
reduced rural poverty.
We, however, in column (3) we ﬁnd no evidence of trend
breaks in the relationship the cumulative number of land reform acts passed by a
state government bears to initial ﬁnancial development. In column (4) we examine
the relationship between the extent of public food distribution in a state and its initial
ﬁnancial development.30
The use of this program as a major poverty alleviation
policy increased in the 1970s, with its incidence showing substantial variation across
states (Besley and Burgess, 2002).
However, again, we see no evidence of trend
breaks. Finally, in columns (5) and (6) we directly consider the shares of government
spending going to sectors which have the potential to impact rural development —
spending on education and health , and other development spending. We ﬁnd no
evidence of trend breaks for these variables.
These ﬁndings suggest that our identiﬁcation strategy is reasonable and that rural
branch expansion aﬀected rural, but not urban, outcomes. We now turn to a more
struct